Satellite Navigation ServicesHome/
                Services/ Satellite Navigation Services

Satellite Navigation Services

Satellites for navigation services to meet the emerging demands of the Civil Aviation requirements and to meet the user requirements of the positioning, navigation and timing based on the independent satellite navigation system. Navigation with Indian Constellation (NavIC)

To meet the positioning, navigation and timing requirements of the nation, ISRO has established a regional navigation satellite system called Navigation with Indian Constellation (NavIC). NavIC was erstwhile known as Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS). NavIC is designed with a constellation of 7 satellites and a network of ground stations operating 24 x 7.

Three satellites of the constellation are placed in geostationary orbit, at 32.5°E, 83°E and 129.5°E respectively, and four satellites are placed in inclined geosynchronous orbit with equatorial crossing of 55°E and 111.75°E respectively, with inclination of 29° (two satellites in each plane). The ground network consists of control centre, precise timing facility, range and integrity monitoring stations, two-way ranging stations, etc. NavIC offers two services: Standard Position Service (SPS) for civilian users and Restricted Service (RS) for strategic users. These two services are provided in both L5 (1176.45 MHz) and S band (2498.028 MHz).

NavIC coverage area includes India and a region up to 1500 km beyond Indian boundary. NavIC signals are designed to provide user position accuracy better than 20m (2) and timing accuracy better than 50ns (2).NavIC SPS signals are interoperable with the other global navigation satellite system (GNSS) signals namely GPS, Glonass, Galileo and BeiDou



A new civilian signal is being introduced in L1 band(1575.42 MHz).NavIC L1 signal is also interoperable with the other GNSS signals. All forthcoming (2023 onwards) NavIC satellites will broadcast SPS signals in L1, L5 and S bands. Few applications:

National and international industry standards:

Signal-in-space interface control document (SIS ICD):

NavIC signal-in-space interface control document provides essential information on the NavIC SPS signal-in-space to facilitate the use of NavIC SPS signals in PNT applications

L5 & S SIS ICD V1.1 - August 2017PDF - 2.0 MB

NavIC_SPS_ICD_L1_V1.0 - August 2023PDF - 3.5 MB

NeQuick-N modelPDF - 1.0 MB

NeQuick-N Input FilesZIP - 200 KB

Week number rollover event:

NavIC system time start epoch is 00:00 UT on Sunday August 22nd 1999 (midnight between August 21st and 22nd).

The first week number rollover event occurred on April 06 2019. The system time is currently in the second epoch. NavIC System Week Number (WN) First Rollover Event

Performance report:

NavIC SPS signal-in-space performance is continuously monitored by a few calibrated receivers maintained by ISRO. The performance reports are published every quarter as a reference for the receiver developers.

Safety-of-life alert dissemination:

The IRNSS-1A spacecraft located in GSO (Geosynchronous Orbit) with longitude crossing at 55°E is presently reconfigured as a satellite for disseminating safety-of-life alert messages. These messages are useful in areas with poor or no terrestrial communication support. Currently this service is used to provide alerts on cyclones, tsunamis and high sea waves to the fishermen community. The Signal-in-Space Interface Control Document for safety-of-life alert dissemination service provides the essential information to facilitate the use of IRNSS-1A signal-in-space for development of receiver and associated applications.

ICD V1.2 – June 2020PDF - 2.1 MB

The safety-of-life alert dissemination service is being extended to support acknowledgement of distress signals generated through the Distress Alert Transmitter (DAT). More details about DAT are available in the SATCOM page. The acknowledgement signal will be generated by the action taking agency and will boost the confidence of the fishermen in distress. The receiver which has a combination of DAT and acknowledgement reception capability is called Second Generation DAT (SG-DAT).

The Signal-in-Space Interface Control Document for safety-of-life alert dissemination service, including the acknowledgement signal of DAT, provides the essential information to facilitate the use of IRNSS-1A signal-in-space for development of SG-DAT receiver and associated applications. ICD V1.2 – February 2021PDF - 1.4 MB

For further information related to navigation service please reach us at:

Satellite Navigation Programme Office, ISRO HQ, AntariskhBhavan, New BEL Road, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India – 560 094

Email: dir-satnavpo[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in
                  Telephone: +91-080-2217 2195,
                  +91-080-2217 2313



GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation (GAGAN)

To meet the navigation requirements of civil aviation, ISRO and Airports Authority of India (AAI) have implemented the GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation – GAGAN as a satellite based augmentation system (SBAS) for the Indian airspace. GAGAN system is inter-operable with other international SBAS systems like US WAAS, European EGNOS, Japanese MSAS etc. GAGAN provides the additional accuracy, availability, and integrity necessary for various phases of flight, from en-route through approach for all qualified airports within the GAGAN service volume.

GAGAN has been certified by Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) for RNP 0.1 services on 30th Dec 2013 and APV -1 services on 21st April 2015. More details regarding GAGAN system and its applications are available at the GAGAN websiteGAGAN

Launch ServicesHome/ Services / Launch Services

Launch services (SSLV,PSLV,GSLVandLVM3)

DoSISRO has been providing Launch services for customer satellites since 1999 onboard ISRO’s Polar Satellite Vehicle (PSLV). Till June 2019, 319 customer satellites from 33 
                    countries have been launched onboard PSLV on commercial basis through its commercial arm . In September 2016, PSLV C-37 has successfully injected 104 satellites into orbit – the 
                    highest number of satellites launched in a single mission so far.

PSLV is a versatile vehicle, capable of launching satellites into LEO (Low Earth Orbit) , SSO, Sub-GTO, GTO (Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit) Orbits. With ISRO operationalising 
                    its Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) and LVM3 and building Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV), as a launch on demand Vehicle, NSIL is in a position to offer and expand 
                    its launch services. The launches will be accomplished from Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC), India’s Spaceport, located at Sriharikota, near Chennai. Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) 
                    employing cryogenic stage is intended to carry heavier satellites of the order of 2200 kg into the Geosynchronous Transfer Orbits (GTO).

The heavy lift launcher LVM3 has enhanced the GTO capability to over 4000 kg. The Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV) is intended to carry 500 kg satellite to 500km LEO (Low Earth Orbit)  Orbit. With the suite of launch vehicles developed 
                    and operationalised by ISRO, NSIL offers comprehensive launch solutions – for both Ride Sharing and Dedicated Missions – with a wide variety of flight proven payload separation systems and adaptors developed in-house 
                    for all category of satellites. For more details on payload separation system Click here.

Space port

Satish Dhawan Space Centre, Sriharikotta, commonly known as SHAR, situated on the Eastern coast of the country 80km off Chennai, is the Space port of India. SHAR is located just above the equator on the Northern latitude bounded 
                    by the vast Indian coast line, making it one of the most ideal launch sites in the world today. The centre has 2 launch complexes – First Launch Pad (FLP) and the Second Launch Pad (SLP)- both possessing state of the art assembly 
                    and clean room facilities. SHAR has had a humble beginning in 1971 with the launch of an RH-125 sounding rocket and the centre has come a long way ever since.

It currently has Solid Motor Production and Testing facilities that are 
                    among the biggest in the world, Propellant Filling and Servicing facilities and state-of-the-art Range Operations for providing reliable Launch Services to the customers. The island has housing facilities for the employees and also has a 
                    fully functional Guest house for the customers who visit the island for launch operations. Launch Complex

SHAR has 2 launch complexes, each capable of providing complete support for vehicle assembly, check out and launch operations for any kind of missions – LEO (Low Earth Orbit) , GEO, Sub-GTO or GTO. The centre also has facilities that can support launch of sounding rockets.

Launch Facilities

SDSC, SHAR provides world class launch infrastructure and has an array of facilities aimed at providing simultaneous preparation and launch of multiple launch vehicles, 
                    over the year. The launch complex has end to end support facilities for vehicle assembly. First Launch Pad

FLP was built in the early 1990’s following the concept of Integrate on the Pad, wherein, after assembling the rocket, a 3200ton Mobile Service Tower (MST), moves backward to it’s parking place.The facility is well equipped to handle the storage, transport and 
                    servicing of both earth storable and cryopropellants.FLP was built in the early 1990’s following the concept of Integrate on the Pad, wherein, after assembling the rocket, a 3200ton Mobile Service Tower (MST), moves backward to it’s parking place.The facility is well 
                    equipped to handle the storage, transport and servicing of both earth storable and cryo propellants. First Launch 20th September 1993, PSLV/IRS-P1

Second Launch Pad

First Launch 5th May 2005, PSLV/Cartosat-1

The launch services are made available throughNSIL.

Further details may be obtainedhere

Satellite, bus, sub-system and testing supportHome/
                Services/Satellite, bus, sub-system and testing support

The department of Space is capable to configure, realise and deliver Satellites, 
                  Spacecraft buses, Satellite subsystems for different applications. DoS works with the customers, 
                  optimize the expertise and facility across the centres to deliver them. The satellites can be built for Communication, 
                  Earth Observation and meteorological purposes. There are two platforms (spacecraft bus) types: 
                  communication and IRS platoforms.

Small satellites can be built

Satellite subsystems like Structure, Thermal systems, mechanisms, power systems, 
                  attitude and orbit control systems, digital and RF systems and propulsion systems are on offer. Facilities like cleanrooms, thermos vacuum testing, Vibration test facility, 
                  Acoustic test facility, Compact antenna test facility, EMI and EMC compatibility test facility can be utilized. To obtain these services, NSIL may be contacted here:Director NSILaa-nsil[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in080-22172696orDeputy manager (Electronics)nishu-nsil[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in080-22172048

Mission SupportHome/
                Services / Mission Support

MISSION SUPPORT SERVICE

With ISRO's experience of having accomplished around 100 satellite missions and 50 launches, NSIL, as
                  its commercial arm, caters to mission operations and related support services for customer satellites. The services are extended through
                  the state-of-art facilities and networks built for both low earth orbiting and geostationary satellite
                  missions.

The facilities are backed by strong technical expertise and experience in satellite
                  operations and management. The satellite
                  ground stations support operations in a variety of frequency bands (S, C, Ku, Ka, UHF and VHF ) and,
                  with configurations to provide round-the-clock uninterrupted services for critical mission functions. Industries/Academia/Space agencies building Satellites in S & X band for Deep Space Mission can use
                  ISRO's antenna terminals. These services may be obtained from NSIL

For further details:

DOS offers complete turnkey solutions to the following:

Launch Vehicle Tracking Services.

Launch Vehicle tracking services from ISRO's Ground Station infrastructure located across the globe. Telemetry Tracking, Commanding (TTC) & Payload Support services for Low Earth Orbit Satellites, launch
                  vehicles through ISRO's 4.6m transportable antenna terminals. Deep Space Mission Antenna for Delta-DOR (DDOR)/Very long Base line Interferometry experimentsservices
                  for Deep Space Missions through ISRO's Deep Space 32m antenna terminal. Real time Telemetry and Tele-command data distribution

The ground stations and the control centers are geographically apart from each other.

Telemetry data
                  acquired at various ground stations is distributed to all the control centers in real time. Tele-commands issued at the control centers are transferred to the appropriate ground station for
                  uplink. The spacecraft controllers at the control center shall be able to see the telemetry data and issue
                  commands from and to the ground stations through a common interface and shall be transparent to the
                  network architecture and other lower level details pertaining to the connectivity between the sites

Optimal satellite contact scheduling for Telemetry, Tracking, Command, and Payload operations

In case of many operational satellites and few ground stations for tracking, there is a need to
                  optimally schedule communication contacts to the satellites with required operations over the
                  available ground stations, so that all the satellites are sufficiently monitored, controlled and
                  maintained in good health. Required satellite contacts are scheduled for the spacecraft to regularly monitor, operate and control
                  the satellites so that they are maintained in good health and serve their intended purpose.

Technical Consultancy for Spacecraft Orbit Determination and Prediction

ISTRAC provides technical consultancy for realizing orbit determination, precise orbit prediction and
                  orbital products for the Earth orbiting / Interplanetary mission

Spacecraft Orbit Determination and Prediction services

ISTRAC provides orbit determination, precise orbit prediction and orbital products for the Earth
                  orbiting / Interplanetary mission

Technical consultancy for Preliminary Orbit Determination

ISTRAC provides technical consultancy for realizing Initial orbit determination and trajectory
                  analysis of the launch vehicle. Location Estimator using MEOSAR (Medium-altitude Earth Orbiting Search and Rescue) data as per
                  COSPAS-SARSAT standard. It provides distress beacon's location as output. MEOSAR location estimator provides distressed beacon's location in near real time.

Useful for to
                  Search & Rescue team establishing the control center. Flight Dynamics Operations(FDO) services for spacecraftand trajectory analysis

This involves following services:

All activities such as Ground-Station Tracking, Station Visibility Timings for Scheduling,
                  Orbit-Coefficients for onboard commanding, Space Situational Awareness to avoid collision are
                  dependent
                  on the daily Flight Dynamics Operations service. Design and establishment of Mission Control Centre for Spacecraft operation

Mission Control Centre (MCC) provides necessary infrastructure for mission operations management. It
                involves computer infrastructure, network, communication service, hosting database and mission control
                software.

Online Beacon Registration for Search and Rescue Services

This is Search and Rescue service provided during distress in the form of alerts and position location
                services through Low Earth Orbiting & Geo-synchronous Orbiting Search and Rescue satellite systems. Alert Dissemination System for Satellite Aided Search And Rescue Services (SASAR)

INMCC along with Local User Terminal is a part of International CSPAS-SARSAT programme, providing
                distress alerts and position location services through Low Earth Orbiting Search And Rescue and
                Geo-synchronous Orbiting Search And Rescue satellite systems. Received Alert with identity and location of distress will help the Search And Rescue authorities in
                rescue operation. Timely dissemination of location will facilitate faster rescue operations and
                reducing the loss of man/material.

Precise coordinate estimation services

Through this service, the user can obtain the precise estimate of the coordinates of the point of
                  interest to an accuracy of a few centimetres. This service can be used by various departments such as Airport Authority, Roads and Railways, Survey
                  departments, Public works departments, forestry etc, to cater various services to the public

Site survey for establishment of satellite ground stations. Site survey is prerequisite prior to establishing any satellite ground station. Site survey ensures
                  that site is free from RF interference and multipath.

This also includes elevation profile survey to
                  ensure that the site is clear from obstacles for ensuring a clear visibility of satellites. This will ensure that the selected site is suitable for establishment of ground station and is free
                  from interference and multipath. It shall also ensure clear visibility to the satellite constellation

Technology transfer/ Technical consultancy for System engineering and design of Precise
                  Time Scale

Precise Time scale is the generation of highly stable and accurate time and frequency signal using
                  atomic clocks. The output is a continuous and reliable time/frequency signal which is a weighted
                  average of the participating clocks.

The time scale is traceable to a chosen reference such as UTC or
                  IST. Precise Time scales can act as the reference time for the satellite navigation constellations (e.g. NavIC, Galileo etc.) as well as for any other precise application such as
                  national timekeeping (e.g. Generation of Indian Standard Time), VLBI,
                  precise time dissemination for users such as financial institutions, telecom service providers and
                  other strategic applications where precise timekeeping is required.

NavIC Timing Receiver Calibration

Absolute calibration of NavIC time transfer and timing receivers with respect to NavIC system time. Users of NavIC receivers can get the receivers calibrated with respect to NavIC system time generated
                  at NavIC control centre. The calibration procedure is absolute in method and hence, has very low
                  uncertainty. Technical Consultancy: Precise Time and Frequency Dissemination

Precise time and frequency dissemination carried out through a variety of techniques to the users
                  depending on the requirements.

The final output (steered to NavIC System Time) can be in the form of 5
                  MHz, 10 MHz, 100 MHz, 1 PPS, NTP, PTP or IRIG. Time Transfer with NavIC System Time

Users can be provided with better accuracy with post-processing methods as well. NavIC advisory System

Navic Advisory is service which provides early information about the planned outages and in real time
                  information about the unplanned outage in the services of NavIC constellation. Academic institutes, research organisations utilizing NavIC services for design, development of survey
                  grade NavIC receivers, post processing for GNSS modelling and other GNSS application users who
                  utilizes NaVIC services can use this services to get the information of planned/unplanned outages of
                  the constellation.

This shall aid them in effective planning of survey works, etc. Web Based IRNSS Messaging Service

IRNSS Messaging service is short messaging services that use NavIC satellites to transmit text
                  messages to general users having NAVIC Messaging Receiver (NMR). The messages can be broadcasted to
                  multiple users at once. Organisation such as IMD, Railways, INCOIS, Coast Guard, Home Department, Ministry of Roadways and all
                  other government agencies who interact with citizens for early warning such as Tsunami, Flood, Rescue,
                  Road Blocks, etc can use this service.

Design and system engineering of earth station

This program can facilitate the design and system engineering for the establishment of ground station
                  meant for tracking and ranging of satellites depending on the user requirements. This program will enable any user who wants to establish an earth station for tracking and ranging of
                  satellites based on CDMA. Design and system engineering of Continuously operating Reference (CORS) station

Network of permanent multi frequency multi constellation GNSS stations to operate continuously. This
                  dense network of stations geographically spread will be design and established to cater various
                  location based services.

This network of stations will facilitate various positioning,
                  surveying and mapping applications, supporting
                  various navigation and transportation applications, Scientific community usages such as geodynamics,
                  troposphere and ionosphere studies etc. Environment Monitoring System (EMS)

This product is capable to perform Temperature measurement, Humidity measurement, fire detection and
                  capable to control a set of fan array based on configurable temperature levels. This product is having
                  remote monitoring and control feature via TCP/IP Ethernet protocol. This system can be installed in places where continuous monitoring of temperature, humidity and
                  detection of fire is required.

Weather Data for Disaster Management

Doppler weather radars are ground based radar sensors for continuous weather surveillance and weather
                  forecasting. Multiple Doppler weather radars are deployed across India in multiple frequency bands. S band DWRs at SDSC SHAR, Cherrapunjee, Gopalpur, Kochi,
                  C band DWR at Trivandrum,
                  X Band DWRs at Chennai and NARL gadanki. Weather monitoring and forecasting for rocket launches

Consultancy for establishment of S band Doppler weather radar at launch stations to support mission
                  related weather monitoring and forecasting activities.

Technical Consultancy for Design and establishment of Wind Profiler systems

Wind Profiler system is phased array radar providing vertical profiles of horizontal winds
                  continuously. Wind Profiler generates atmospheric wind moment in U, V and W directions; it generates vertical
                  profiles of horizontal wind velocities & directions, along with noise level estimation and spectrum
                  width. Wind profiler helps to study the atmospheric dynamics over seasons, geographies and different heights,
                  by generating the wind dynamics from Wind Profiler system data. Study of atmospheric dynamics is an important input to the meteorologists / researchers and space
                  scientists for devising the real time atmospheric model and hence to forecast / now cast the weather
                  phenomena.

Wind Profiler data processing software

Advanced Data Products (ADP) is an advanced signal processing software. It is used in atmospheric wind
                  moment's generation in U, V and W directions; from phased array based wind Profiler radar system
                  data.it generates vertical profiles of horizontal wind velocities & directions, along with noise level
                  estimation and spectrum width. Advanced Data products software helps to study the atmospheric dynamics over seasons, geographies and
                  different heights, by generating the wind dynamics from Wind Profiler system data. For a country like India, where agriculture is the prime source of survival, precise study and
                  forecasting of weather is very critical to safe guard the lives and livelihood.

Study of atmospheric dynamics is an important input to the meteorologists / researchers and space
                  scientists for devising the real time atmospheric model and hence to forecast / now cast the weather
                  phenomena. Weather Radar Data processing software

Weather radar data products” is signal processing and display software for polarimetric Doppler
                  weather radars. It generates critical weather data products, like, reflectivity, velocity, spectrum
                  width, differential reflectivity, differential propagation phase and correlation coefficient. Weather radar data products software is used in all the Doppler weather radars for generating
                  important data products like reflectivity, velocity, spectrum width, differential reflectivity,
                  differential propagation phase and correlation coefficient.

It provides real-time or near real-time weather monitoring, tracking & reporting of weather events
                  like cyclones, cloud burst, thunderstorm, rain-fall estimates etc. DWR data products along with their
                  advanced derived data products are used for weather forecasting by several models or agencies (like
                  IMD). These data products are used for rain fall estimation and classification of hydrometeors

Dual-polarimetric Doppler Weather radars (DWRs)

Doppler Weather Radars are the ground based microwave radar sensors detecting & tracking weather
                  phenomenon up to 500kms. The operating frequencies of DWRs can vary from S-band to X-band depending on
                  the terrain, application and range coverage.

Doppler weather radar provides real-time or near real-time weather monitoring, tracking & reporting of
                  weather events like cyclones, cloud burst, thunderstorm, rain-fall estimates etc. DWR data products
                  along with their advanced derived data products are used for weather forecasting by several models or
                  agencies (like IMD). Design and development of Wind Profiler Radars

Wind Profiler Radars are the ground based microwave clear-air radars which records the wind speed,
                  direction and its vertical profiles w.r.t elevation up to troposphere (10-15 km.) altitude. These
                  vertically pointing radars sense the fluctuations in the refractive index of the clear air created due
                  to wind turbulence, and measure radar reflectivity and radial velocity (amongst several other data
                  product) from the echo of its own transmitted signal.

Wind Profiler Radars helps to study the atmospheric dynamics over seasons, geographies and different
                  heights, by generating the wind dynamics and its profile over elevation. Study of atmospheric dynamics is an important input to the meteorologists / researchers and space
                  scientists for devising the real time atmospheric model and hence to forecast / now cast the weather
                  phenomena. The same is also used for launch vehicle or airport flight preparation and readiness where
                  vertical wind turbulence is a critical factor. Ground Station Antenna Mechanical Design and Development

Mechanical design and development of 18m to 32m deep space antenna system.

Commissioning of antenna for deep space antennas

Mechanical design and development of indigenous upto4.6m Ship Borne Transportable Terminal
                      Antenna

Mechanical design and development of S/X/Ka Band feed for Antenna systems. Feed system is a major element of antenna system in communicating with launch vehicle and
                        satellite. Major features are:

Feed system is a major element in antenna system in communicating with the satellite. Assembly
                        of feed
                        system to the antenna.

Ground system support & servicesHome/Services/ Ground system support & services

DoS can establish, maintain and service ground systems required for the Space Technology for national and international users. Services include turn key end to end solutions in designing, system engineering, procurement, installation, commissioning, operationalization, hosting and maintenance of state of the art satellite at stations or TTC stations and associated support systems. More details arehere. International Ground Segment (IGS)  Services

Overview

NRSC has wealth of images from Indian and foreign remote sensing satellites in its archives.

It also has the capability to acquire data pertaining to any part of the globe on demand. NRSC has been instrumental in promoting IRS data for International users and agencies by providing data and technical services. NRSC also enables ANTRIX, the commercial and marketing arm of ISRO, to execute various remote sensing services for International Customers worldwide. Data Acquisition & Processing Support :Providing turnkey solutions by establishment of ground segment systems from Planning, Antenna systems, direct data receiving, processing and catalogue generation.

Establishment of  Virtual ground Station (VGS).Setting up Virtual ground stations (VGS). Providing users near real-time, full resolution RAW satellite data using ISRO's own constellation of ground stations for generating data products locally at the user's site

Further details are capturedhere

Calibration Services

Overview

National Remote Sensing Center(NRSC)/ISRO has established and operationalised an unique Cal-Val facility in IMGEOS Complex at Shadnagar, Hyderabad to enable the calibration needs of Optical and Microwave sensors. It has built the technical competence to collaborate for the Calibration of foreign remote sensing sensors. The facility is designed to perform the radiometric calibration of high resolution multispectral data (better than 10m) at 5 different radiometric levels from 7% to 50% reflectance levels simultaneously and mid resolution data ( better than 25m) at two different levels 7% and 30% in the VNIR & SWIR spectral bands.

The five targets are developed using natural materials of stone and soil and they well maintained for the spatial/temporal stability during the favourable period of October to May. NRSC has also established a microwave calibration site consisting of corner reflectors in a 200m x 80m area to conduct SAR calibration exercises for present and future Space borne and Airborne SAR missions to support calibration activities during the commissioning and operational phase . Ample care has been taken to maintain calibration site in vegetation free condition with low background level which is an important factor for absolute radiometric calibration. Further details are mentionedhere.

Satellite Ground Station Services

The department of Space can establish antenna systems for receiving remote sensing satellite data at S and X band for Indian and foreign users subject to approval of IN-SPACe. Indian remote sensing satellite program has witnessed rapid technological advancement both on space and ground segments in the last few decades. With the emerging high-resolution satellite programs with increased data rates from 10 Mbps to 960 Mbps, the role of ground station has become more critical. Keeping in view of these challenges, NRSC designed and developed an S/X band dual polarization 7.5M antenna system to meet the current and future Earth observation mission requirements.

While DoSdevelop and install a 7.5M S/X band antenna system as a new ground station. The following inputs are required. Typical Ground Station specifications and contact details arehere

Further, ISRO offers Technical Consultancy for Setting up of 10m/11m Full motion antennas in S/X/Ka band frequencies anywhere across the globe. Scope of work includes Planning, design, system engineering, testing, and operationalization of the system.

ISTRAC/DOS provides Technical Consultancy for Setting up of 10m/11m Full motion antennas in S/X/Ka band frequencies anywhere across the globe. Scope of work includes Planning, design, system engineering, testing, and operationalization of the system. Technical Consultancy for mission planning, analysis and execution 
                                            Different Mission scenario analysis to meet the mission objectives. During this consultancy, user will get

Satellite mission operation has different phase like, prelaunch, initial phase, normal phase, contingencies phase and decommissioning phase.

During each phase different sequence of activity needs to be performed to ensure proper function of the satellite throughout its mission life. Also, Satellite mission operation needs multiple software tools to handle the mission scenario. During this consultancy, user will get

Visibility Analysis for Ground stations planning

Station co-ordinates selection and their Visibility Analysis based on launch events and vehicle trajectory

Useful inlaunch vehicle activities to deploy network of stations to track, monitor the launch vehicle and spacecraft during the launch phase and mission planning. Ground Station Antenna Angle Calibration

Provides Telemetry Tracking, Commanding station Antenna angle calibration for the ground stations

engaged either for launch vehicle tracking during the launch or for spacecraft tracking to meet the pointing accuracy

Telemetry Tracking, Commanding ground station antenna pointing accuracy is very much essential for tracking either launch vehicle/rocket or spacecraft object.

This service is useful for Users involved in precise tracking of either launch vehicle or spacecraft accounting azimuth and elevation biases through the antennae angles calibration campaign phase

Satellite Communication & Lease of transpondersHome/ Services /

                                Satellite Communication & Lease of transponders

DoS provides national space infrastructure for the telecommunication needs of the

                                    country and facilitates the provision of the same through private agencies,

                                    subjected to authorisation. DoS provides required transponders and facilities out of its own capacity as well as

                                    by hiring additional capacity, if needed. It can register Indian Satellite System for public and private sectors

CommunicationSatellites support telecommunication, television broadcasting,

                                    satellite news gathering, societal applications, weather forecasting, disaster

                                    warning and Search and Rescue operation services

DOS has been enabling these services through INSAT system. The Indian National

                                    Satellite (INSAT) system is one of the largest domestic communication satellite

                                    systems in Asia-Pacific region with nine operational communication satellites placed

                                    in Geo-stationary orbit.

Established in 1983 with commissioning of INSAT-1B, it

                                    initiated a major revolution in India’s communications sector and sustained the same

                                    later. GSAT-17 joins the constellation of INSAT System consisting 15 operational

                                    satellites, namely - INSAT-3A, 3C, 4A, 4B, 4CR and GSAT-6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 15,

                                    16 and 18. The INSAT system with more than 200 transponders in the C, Extended C and

                                    Ku-bands provides services. The HTS capacity on-board GSAT-11 and GSAT-19 satellites are available for open

                                    allotment.

DOS, GOI offers the transponders on lease. Leasing services are made

                                    available through New Space India Limited (NSIL), a government of India company

                                    under the DOS.https://www.nsilindia.co.inInterested users are requested to apply through ICRF. Request for transponder capacity for long term use

Guidelines for application:click herePDF - 283 KB

Application form:click herePDF - 172 KB

Request for Transponder Capacity for Occasional Use

Guidelines for application:click herePDF - 277 KB

Application form:click herePDF - 606 KB

For any clarification, users may get in touch with SATCOM Programme Office (080 2217

                                    2317; nilanjan[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in)

further information, please contact:

For technical information

SATCOM Program Office

Phone :08022172317, 08022172381

Email :spi[dot]satcom-po[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

For commercial information

Manager , Business Development

New Space India Limited

Phone :08022172688

Email :sumit-nsil[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

For commercial information

Sr Manager(SATCOM)

Antrix Corporation Limited

Phone :08022178328

Email :sonali[at]antrix[dot]co[dot]in

Space Based Earth Observation ApplicationsHome/ Services / Space Based Earth Observation Applications

High-Resolution Operational Soil Moisture Product

ISRO provides satellite services required for weather forecasting,
                                monitoring etc. It provide satellite imagery required for the developmental and security
                                needs of the country.

Further, it provides satellite imagery and specific products and
                                services required for application of space science and technology for developmental
                                purposes to the Central Government, State Governments, Quasi Governmental Organisations,
                                NGOs and the private sector. The data obtained from earth observation satellites is utilized for
                                various applications on ground including agriculture, forestry, mining, water
                                management, rural and urban development et cetera. The data is processed for a specific
                                application by ISRO experts or those trained by ISRO working in various departments. It
                                can be obtained by individuals or government or private agencies.

Some data is made
                                available freely while the remaining is on payment basis. All these applications are made available throughBhuvanandBhoonidhiportals. Bhuvan portal displays the projects that have been conducted so far. Most of them are done in collaboration with other government departments or state
                                government or local authorities

For making complete use of the Bhuvan portal, users are suggested to
                                use these resources.

The Earth Observation Satellite Data can be procured atBhoonidhiportal.

https://bhuvan.nrsc.gov.in/forum/viewtopic.php?f=3&t=247https://bhuvan.nrsc.gov.in/wiki/index.php/Homehttps://bhuvan-app3.nrsc.gov.in/data/download/index.phphttps://uops.nrsc.gov.in/ImgeosUops/land.htmlhttps://ndem.nrsc.gov.in/login.phpBhuvan WikiBhuvan Data ProductsBhuvan Free data download

The data available in Bhuvan portal can be categorized as thematic,
                                sectoral, disaster management support and government associated projects. With thematic menu the users can obtain the maps or
                                                the data for the area of their geographical interest on the following
                                                themes. The thematic applications are available for most of the
                                                geographical areas. Following links can be used for obtaining the
                                                services.

Users may use the following links

Earth observation satellite data can be utilized for
                                                disaster management in the following areas. Governance applications: As required by various
                                                government agencies, the Bhuvan portal has disseminated the data for
                                                governance applications. Earth observation application sectors: The earth
                                                observation satellite data is utilized for specific applications in
                                                specific areas. The following sectoral applications indicate the
                                                capabilities, potentials of earth observation applications.

Bhoonidhi enables access to our extensive archive of
                                                Remote Sensing data from 46 satellites, including Indian and Foreign
                                                Remote Sensing sensors acquired over 33 years. It also facilitates the
                                                Regional distribution of Sentinel and LandSat-8 data in India. Meteorological & Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival
                                CentreHome/
                                Services/Meteorological & Oceanographic Application

The meteorological and oceanographic data obtained by the satellites is utilized for
                                    wide applications on ground. Meteorological & Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre(MOSDAC)

In addition, the related data can be obtained from Bhuvan portal also.

The data is made available with support from other departments such as …

The services are available for citizens and various government departments. To
                                    obtain additional, feasible services ….. may be contacted. Some of the data is available for all, freely. Rest of the data can be procuredhere

Following links may be used to learn and obtain the data.

Disaster management: National and internationalHome/ Services / Disaster management: National and international

Space based inputs offer unique and crucial dataduring natural disasters viz. flood, cyclone, agricultural drought, landslides, 
                    earthquakes and forest fires in near real-time using space and aerial remote sensing  based inputs.These services are available free for all users. National Database for Emergency Management(NDEM)serves as national repository of GIS based database for entire country coupled with set of Decision Support 
                    System tools to assist the State / Central  Disaster Management Authorities in decision making during emergency situations. Current activities to support disaster management support are : Near Real Time Flood & Cyclone monitoring & mapping in the country, Flood Hazard/Risk Zonation for 
                    Flood prone states, Spatial Flood Early Warning, forest fire alerts, landslide zonation and inventory, agricultural drought studies and  Capacity Building and institutionalization 
                    is being done to the stake holders. DOS extends satellite data support under the following International Disaster programmes

The services are available for the countries including Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Iraq, Japan, Myanmar, Nepal, Oman, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Taiwan, Tajikistan, Thailand, Vietnam.

Bhuvan portaldeals with several of the disasters. MOSDACoffers inputs to handle other disasters under announcements and alerts. To develop new applications, one can contact ….

https://ndem.nrsc.gov.in/login.php

NDEM essentially serves as national repository of GIS based data for entire country coupled with set of Decision Support System tools to assist the disaster managers in decision making during emergency situations. National Database for Emergency Management (NDEM) is a national repository of multi-scale geospatial database coupled with decision support system tools.

It is a unique and homogenous database served for entire country with 
                    essential database elements for addressing emergency/disaster management in the country. NRSC/ISRO established a state-of-art facility with structured framework with multi-institutional participation to assist the disaster managers 
                    of all States/UTs for preparedness, hazard/risk zonation, damage assessment, and emergency response under the behest of Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), Government of India. NDEM services have been operationalised since 2013 providing 
                    timely information along with disaster specific products for effective decision making. Aerial Services & Digital MappingHome/Services / Aerial Services & Digital Mapping

Aerial Services and Digital Mapping (ASDM) services cover generation of large scale topographic maps and very high resolution Digital Terrain Models (DTM) for highly flood prone river reaches in India, and for  2D/3D mapping in urban areas.

The imagery obtained from UAVs can immensely support in many applications ranging from large-scale mapping, disaster assessment, infrastructure planning, urban modeling to vegetation structure mapping. Details of the services available from NRSC, DOS areHere

NESAC has conducted 60+ UAV surveys until the date to assist different line departments and research work in NER. NESAC conducts on demand surveys for different line departments to support their planning activities at a very nominal cost. Details of the services available from NESAC, DOS areHere

ADecrease font size.AReset font size.AIncrease font size.

Space technology applications in agriculture and allied areas in north eastern states took big leap after the establishment of NESAC. Since 2002, a number of user-specific and R&D projects have been initiated. The North-Eastern Region of India, which includes Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim, and Tripura, has a total cropped area of 5.3 million hectares and a population of approximately 45.6 million people. The region is distinguished by difficult terrain, wide variations in slope, altitude, land tenure systems and agricultural practises.

Shifting cultivation is common in NER, and a large number of tribal ethnic minorities practise it. It is practised not only by tribal minorities but also by landless people in some parts of this region. Following are the few major areas of remote sensing applications in Agriculture and allied areas. Following are the few major areas of remote sensing applications in Agriculture and Allied areas.

The agricultural production system in the NE region is predominantly rainfed, mono-cropped at subsistence level. The information system and database of agricultural statistics in the region is very weak particularly for the hilly states. This is mainly due the fact that these areas are not having cadastral surveys and area measurements are recorded on an adhoc basis. Under such circumstances, there is scope of enhancing the capabilities of existing system of crop acreage estimation with the adoption of modern tools like remote sensing and geographic information system.

Considering the fact that reliable information on the acreage and production of different crops in the hilly states are not available, a project under FASAL programme titled ‘Developing remote sensing based methodology for collecting crop statistics in north eastern hilly region’ has been undertaken in a phased manner since 2003-04. Results of rice acreage estimation has been found to be satisfactory and made operational. The pilot project taken the state of Meghalaya and Tripura has now been extended to all 7 north eastern hilly states viz., Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. The developed methodology is envisaged to be extended to the regional project “Applications of Space Techniques for Agricultural Assessment in NER (ASAAN)” under PoA.

Maize is the second most important crop in North East India. Despite this, meager work has been done in the area of RS to estimate its area and production. NESAC has collaborated with SAC, Ahmedabad to develop a methodology for delineation of maize in Meghalaya and Assam under SUFALAM (Space technology Utilization for Food Security, AgricuLtural Assessment and Monitoring) Programme. The developed methodology will be applied to the other NER states.

Development of plot to block level maize yield models using CCE data, UAV and satellite-data is currently in progress. A  pilot  study  for  estimating  the  area  and  production  under  major  crops  in  Meghalaya  has  been  taken  up  using  geospatial  technologies  with  a  view  to  improve  the  existing  system  of  crop  acreage  estimates. The  study  has  been  taken  up  as  a  part  of  SSS  (Support  for  Statistical  Strengthening)   programme   of   the   Ministry   of   Statistics and Programme Implementation (MOSPI), Govt. of India. As a component of Smart CCE, NESAC has optimized the selection of sample CCE villages using geospatial technology and developed an integrated methodology for identification and delineation of major crops in Meghalaya using satellite remote sensing in conjunction with field surveys.

The study has demonstrated the applicability of geospatial technology for acreage estimation of selected crops across the undulating topography of Meghalaya. As one of the major subsidiary activities of Agriculture, Sericulture still has a tremendous scope for expansion particularly in non-traditional sericulture states and non-traditional districts in traditional sericulture states. NESAC has taken up a major national project titled Applications of remote sensing and GIS in Sericulture Development covering 178 districts (Phase I: 108, Phase II : 70) in 25 states in the country (61 districts in NER) for mapping of potential areas for sericulture development in two phases. The web-portal called Sericulture Information Linkages and Knowledge System (SILKS) developed under the project is helping sericulturists and planners in the country.

SILKS has been developed using Open source GIS as a single window decision support system to provide spatial and non-spatial information for selected districts in the country and hosted in the public domain at http://silks.csb.gov.in. SILKS portal currently host data services for more than 1000 sets of spatial layers consisting of potential areas for expansion of sericulture development in a single window access system. Additionally, each SILKS is supported by 16 non-spatial modules on sericulture planning, farmers advisory and other services specific to the district. The information system is made in such a way that it is easily accessible by the users through a single window interactive web application.

To make it wider accessibility among local farmers and planners, the site is made multi-lingual comprising 12 major local languages of India. Mulberry acreage and leaf protein estimation of four district of West Bengal was carried out in collaboration with Central Sericultural Research and Training Institute (CSR&TI), Berhampore. Estimation of mulberry acreage in four districts of West Bengal were brought out at block level. Hyperspectral RS techniques were employed for estimation of leaf protein in conjunction with laboratory analysis.

An MIS has been development as a decision making tool at farmers level and integrated with SILKS portal. NESAC in collaborating with Central Muga Eri Research & Training Institute (CMER&TI), Jorhat is working on development of decision support system for early warning of selected Muga silkworm diseases and pests with geospatial techniques. Under the North East Textile Promotion Scheme (NERTPS) initiated by Central Silk Board (CSB) for 8 states of a large number of seri-assets have been created. The requirement to have spatial distribution of all the assets for monitoring of the effectiveness of the programme was felt.

With this background, it was proposed to geo-tag all the assets created under NERTPS. A GPS aided Geo-augmented Navigation (GAGAN) based mobile app for field data collection called ‘SILKS’ was developed at NESAC. About 40000 assets of CSB have been geo-tagged in the exercise. Moreover, a dashboard called ‘SeriGeotag’ has been developed using open source technology to visualize and monitor the assets created under NERTPS program of CSB in NER.

NESAC in collaboration with Central Tasar Research and Training Institute (CTR&TI) is studying the “Existence of Tropical Tasar Silkworm Ecoraces and their Subsist Places with the help of geospatial technology.” The distribution maps of Sal, Asan and Arjun (the three major host plants of Tropical Tasar silkworm,Anthereae mylitta) has been prepared for Ranchi and West Singhbhum districts of Jharkhand. As a part of the project, a mobile app called ‘TasarGeotag’ has been created for ground truth collection and a web-based dashboard for visualization of the collected data during ground truth surveys as well as classified maps showing distribution of the host plants has been developed. Under the national level scheme ‘Silk Samagra 2’, funded by CSB, NESAC has developed a mobile application for field data collection. The centre will also assist in monitoring the activities of the project through space based support.

As a part of PoA projects, NESAC will provide support for the expansion of Muga Sericulture using space technology in Assam. Availability of information on agriculture to the users is very essential for development of agriculture. The concept of such information kiosk should be a ‘single window’ access to knowledge base in the field of agriculture sector to facilitate the agricultural reform processes. Such a system has designed as an information system, called Agro-climatic Planning and Information Bank (APIB).

The system has been developed for East Khasi Hills district of Meghalaya and currently available at www.megapib.nic.in. The APIB ‘Knowledge base’ can form an important part of the extension machinery of various departments involved in sustainable development. NESAC is engaging in development of Mobile App to support different user communities in the Agriculture and allied areas sector. For the Agriculture Department of Arunachal Pradesh, a mobile App has been developed for collecting agricultural data and hosting of same in Bhuvan Web Portal and North Eastern Spatial Data Repository (NESDR).

To train the state level, district level and field level officers of Agriculture and allied departments of North Eastern Region on geo-tagging of Rashtriya Krishi Vikash Yojana (RKVY) Assets using Bhuvan-RKVY mobile app, NESAC is supporting NRSC, Hyderbad. NESAC has also developed a mobile app (CCE App) for the Directorate of Economics and Statistics (DES), Govt. of Meghalaya to strengthen the data collection for CCE. A web based spatial dashboard has been developed at NESAC for visualization of sampling plan and data collected during CCE. The dashboard has all the necessary features for interactive visualization, navigation; map query based on filtering based approach and visualization of statistics via charting tools.

NESAC in collaboration with the Department of Agriculture & Farmers’ Welfare, Govt of Meghalaya has completed a GIS web portal “Meghalaya Rice Information System” (MeRIS) which is now LIVE at this linkhttps://apps.nesdr.gov.in/mris/index.html. Use of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) has added new dimensions and possibilities for very high resolution mapping and monitoring agriculture resources. A number of surveys have been carried out for crop area assessment, crop damage assessment and crop growth monitoring. Farmers from Morigaon and Nagaon districts of Assam got a major shock during the month of April, 2016, when they encountered severe pest infestation in their Boro paddy (summer paddy) areas, which was very unusual for them.

Considering the severity of pest infestation and the spread, it was planned to conduct a rapid assessment of extent of crop damage through a UAV. The assessment report was provided to the concerned department to take immediate intervention measures. The survey also helped the District Agriculture Department to visualize and assess the extent of damage to provide compensation for the affected farmers. It has been realized that these information will provide valuable inputs to ‘Pradhanmantri Fasal Bima Yojana’ and KISAN (Crop Insurance using Space Technology and Geoinformatics) Programme which have emphasized on use of mobile and satellite technology including UAVs to facilitate accurate assessment and quick settlement of claims for insured crops.

Another exercise was conducted for digital mapping of the individual households and farms in conjunction with socio-economic survey at household level in association with Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Government of Meghalaya as per NSSO guidelines. Socio-economic indicators on education, gender, poverty, housing, amenities, employment and agricultural farming have been evaluated for the village. Linking of each agricultural farms and crop lands to household information in GIS domain will form the basis for development of a Village Information System. An exercise was carried out at Laskein development block in West Jaintia Hills district of Meghalaya for discrimination of horticultural crops considering the presence of multiple crop and mixed cropping in nature.

Discrimination of stressed maize crop from healthy maize crops using NDVI index in Kharupetia village of Darrang district of Assam has been undertaken using UAV borne multispectral sensors. UAV  surveys  were conducted  under CCE project by using multispectral  and  RGB  sensors  in  selected  sample locations  covering different strata  of  rice  ecosystems. The collected data were processed in Pix4D Mapper Software and various indices were generated to correlate with CCE field data. This has led to the development of yield models for yield assessment of the selected crops.

These models require more trials and validation for operational use. Systematic R&D through UAVs have been planned for the entire crop growth cycle in selected sites as a part of the regional project “Applications of Space Techniques for Agricultural Assessment in NER (ASAAN)” under PoA. Integration of UAV based sensors and Field IoT sensors has been planned for automation of irrigation and health assessment of potato crop in selected locations of Assam. Crop condition assessment is made to diagnose any stress due to nutrient deficiency, flood, drought, disease and pest infestation etc.

Every year flood leads to huge loss of cultivated lands in Assam in terms of lakhs of hectares. Time-series crop growth stages from EO platforms are generated in a scheduled manner along with flood inundation information from other ISRO centres and SAR satellite imagery to assess the extent of crop damage. Bankline monitoring and assessment of crop loss is also done at regular basis. Crop damage assessment and severity maps of seasonal agricultural drought has been generated based on different indices/ parameters such as rainfall based indices, crop condition related indices.

Crop condition assessment under abiotic stress of few selected major crops of NER has been carried out for generation of spectral signature at different stress conditions during crop growth stages. Technologies like unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) were implemented in agriculture for multiple tasks such as spraying pesticide, and monitoring crop health and rapid assessment of the extent of crop damage due to insect, pest and disease infestation. LAST UPDATEDJuly 22, 2025 - 4:32 pm

SITE VISITORS

© 2009-2025 NESAC

North-East India region specific applicationsHome/ Services/North-East India region specific applications

Space based applications and utilities are customised for the North East India region. Government of India has established NE-SAC for serving 
                                            the specific needs of North-East region of Indiacomprising the states of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim 
                                            and Tripura.

The region is characterized by difficult terrain, wide variations in slopes, altitude, land tenure systems and diverse cultivation practices. Many of these programmes are supported by various departments or ministries. Remote sensing data based applications are as follows. Details are providedhere

ADecrease font size.AReset font size.AIncrease font size.

The imagery obtained from UAVs can immensely support in many applications ranging from large-scale mapping, disaster assessment, infrastructure planning, urban modeling to vegetation structure mapping. Specifically in the NE region of our country with limited connectivity and difficult terrain condition, the local planning and developmental activities can be greatly improved by the UAV survey. NESAC has conducted 60+ UAV surveys until the date to assist different line departments and research work in NER. NESAC has also facilitated all the State Remote Sensing Centres of NER in establishing UAV facility under the project “Use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) Remote Sensing (UAV-RS)) for the States of NE region (NER)” funded by NEC.

NESAC also conducts on demand surveys for different line departments to support their planning activities at a very nominal cost. Some of the user departments are as mentioned below :

LAST UPDATEDJuly 25, 2025 - 4:00 pm

SITE VISITORS

© 2009-2025 NESAC

Vedas ServicesHome/
                Services / Vedas Services

VEDAS portal serves to disseminate the data useful for various application. The portal may be browsed
                  for understanding and obtaining the services. Anyone can obtain these services.

All the services are
                  free. Users can visualise and analyse the data for the purpose. The services include:

Transfer Orbit ServiceHome/ Services / Transfer Orbit Service

Master Control Facility(MCF)at Hassan in
                  Karnataka and Bhopal in Madhya Pradesh
                  monitors and controls all the Geostationary / Geosynchronous satellites of ISRO,
                  namely, INSAT, GSAT and IRNSS series of satellites. It also provides Transfer Orbit Support Services for Geo-Synchronous (GEO) Missions.

Contact Us



Master Control Facility

PB No. 66,Salgame Road, HassanPIN 573201Karnataka (India)Email Id: director[at]mcf[dot]gov[dot]in

Satellite Aided Search And RescueHome/ Services /Satellite Aided Search And Rescue

SATELLITE AIDED SEARCH AND RESCUE OPERATIONS

INMCC SAVIOR IN SPACE: International COSPAS-SARSAT System



INMCC (Indian Mission Control Center, located at ISTRAC, Bangalore)

                  is the nodal agency responsible for providing distress alert location from India and 7 other

                  neighboring countries

Mission

The International COSPAS-SARSAT program provides accurate, timely, and reliable

                  distress alert with location data to help search and rescue authorities to assist persons in distress. Objective

The objective of the COSPAS-SARSAT system is to reduce Delays/Time Required to

                  Locate, as far as possible, for distress alerts to SAR services, and provide assistance, which have a

                  direct impact on the probability of survival of the person in distress at sea or on land

Search and Rescue (SAR) services are committed operational services by INMCC

                  (ISTRAC-ISRO) to national and international community (RCCs: Rescue Coordination Center, MRCCs:

                  Maritime Rescue Coordination Center, SPOCs: Search and Rescue Point of Contact and other MCCs: Mission

                  Control Center). ISRO as a member of International COSPAS-SARSAT program supports SAR services by

                  providing space (INSAT-3DR and GSAT-17) and ground segment components of the system comprising of 2

                  LEOLUTs (Bangalore and Lucknow) and 1 GEOLUT and INMCC at Bangalore. The system has been operational

                  since 1989-90.

INMCC is in the process of developing the in-house MEOLUT (MEOSAR ground segment). MEOSAR ground segment has completed POC (Proof of Concept) and will be able to provide near

                  instantaneous distress alert signal transmitted by people in distress



Real Alert Statistics



Department of Space (DOS)is Government of India department mandated with the execution of Indian
                                    Space Programme. The Department of Space has evolved the following
                                    programmes with the objective of promoting & developing application of
                                    space science and space technology:



Department of space, through its agency ISRO, accomplishes space
                                    missions to fulfil its vision, mission and objectives. Here are the missions, in numbers.

Spacecraft Missions*

Satellites realised by private players or students

Foreign satellites launched by ISRO

Launch Missions**

Re-entry Missions & POEMS

Launch missions facilitated by ISRO

Gaganyaan

* Including
                                    3 Nano Satellites, 1 Micro Satellite

*** of 34 Countries

November 23, 2022

The primary mandate of HSFC is to spearhead ISRO's Gaganyaan programme through co-ordinated
                        efforts and focus all the activities that are carried out in other ISRO centres, research labs
                        in India, Indian academia and Industries towards accomplishing the mission. HSFC, as the lead
                        Centre for Human space flight activities conforms to high standards of reliability and human
                        safety in undertaking R&D activities in new technology areas, such as life support systems,
                        Human Factors Engineering, Bioastronautics, Crew training and Human rating & certification. These areas would constitute important components for future sustained human space flight
                        activities like rendezvous and docking, space station building and interplanetary collaborative
                        manned missions to Moon/Mars and near-earth asteroids. More Details

Gaganyaan

Gaganyaan project envisages demonstration of human spaceflight capability by launching crew of 3
                    members to an orbit of 400 km for a 3 days mission and bring them back safely to earth, by landing
                    in Indian sea waters.

The project is accomplished through an optimal strategy by considering inhouse expertise, experience
                    of Indian industry, intellectual capabilities of Indian academia & research institutions along
                    with cutting edge technologies available with international agencies. The pre-requisites for
                    Gaganyaan mission include development of many critical technologies including human rated launch
                    vehicle for carrying crew safely to space, Life Support System to provide an earth like environment
                    to crew in space, crew emergency escape provision and evolving crew management aspects for training,
                    recovery and rehabilitation of crew. Various precursor missions are planned for demonstrating the Technology Preparedness Levels before
                    carrying out the actual Human Space Flight mission. These demonstrator missions include Integrated Air Drop Test (IADT), Pad Abort Test (PAT) and Test
                    Vehicle (TV) flights.

Safety and reliability of all systems will be proven in unmanned missions
                    preceding manned mission. Human rated LVM3 - HLVM3

LVM3 rocket - The well proven and reliable heavy lift launcher of ISRO, is identified as the launch
                    vehicle for Gaganyaan mission. It consists of solid stage, liquid stage and cryogenic stage. All
                    systems in LVM3 launch vehicle are re-configured to meet human rating requirements and christened
                    Human Rated LVM3.

HLVM3 will be capable of launching the Orbital Module to an intended Low Earth
                    Orbit of 400 km. HLVM3 consists of Crew Escape System (CES) powered by a set of quick acting, high burn rate solid
                    motors which ensures that Crew Module along with crew is taken to a safe distance in case of any
                    emergency either at launch pad or during ascent phase. Orbital Module



Orbital Module (OM) that will be Orbiting Earth comprises of Crew Module (CM) and Service Module
                    (SM). OM is equipped with state-of-the-art avionics systems with adequate redundancy considering
                    human safety.

CM is the habitable space with Earth like environment in space for the crew. It is of double walled
                    construction consisting of pressurized metallic Inner Structure and unpressurised External Structure
                    with Thermal Protection System (TPS). It houses the crew interfaces, human centric products, life
                    support system, avionics and deceleration systems. It is also designed for re-entry to ensure safety
                    of the crew during descent till touchdown.

SM will be used for providing necessary support to CM while in orbit. It is an unpressurized
                    structure containing thermal system, propulsion system, power systems, avionics systems and
                    deployment mechanisms. New technologies being developed for Gaganyaan

Human safety is of paramount importance in Gaganyaan mission. In order to ensure the same, various new
                  technologies comprising of Engineering systems and Human centric systems are being developed and
                  realised.

Crew training for Gaganyaan

Astronaut Training Facility established in Bengaluru caters to Classroom training, Physical Fitness
                  training, Simulator training and Flight suit training. Training modules cover academic courses,
                  Gaganyaan Flight Systems, Micro-gravity familiarization through Parabolic Flights, Aero-medical
                  training, Recovery & Survival training, mastering of Flight Procedures and training on Crew
                  Training Simulators. Aero medical training, Periodical flying practice and Yoga are also included as
                  part of the training. Milestones achieved so far





Test vehicle for characterisation of Crew Escape System ready at SDSC



Major milestones planned



More Details

NASA-ISRO SAR (NISAR) SatelliteHome/Activities/Future Missions/NASA-ISRO SAR (NISAR) Satellite

Feb 01, 2023



NASA-ISRO SAR (NISAR) is a Low Earth Orbit (LEO) observatory being jointly developed
                                    by NASA and ISRO.

NISAR will map the entire globe in 12 days and provide spatially
                                    and temporally consistent data for understanding changes in Earth’s ecosystems, ice
                                    mass, vegetation biomass, sea level rise, ground water and natural hazards including
                                    earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes and landslides. NISAR. It carries L and S dual band
                                    Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR), which operates with Sweep SAR technique to achieve
                                    large swath with high resolution data. The SAR payloads mounted on Integrated Radar
                                    Instrument Structure (IRIS) and the spacecraft bus are together called an
                                    observatory.

Jet Propulsion Laboratories and ISRO are realizing the observatory
                                    which shall not only meet the respective national needs but also will feed the
                                    science community with data encouraging studies related to surface deformation
                                    measurements through repeat-pass InSAR technique. More Details

This flagship partnership would have major contributions from both agencies.NASAis responsible for providing theL-Band SAR payload systemin
                                    which theISROsuppliedS-Band SAR payload and both these SAR systems will
                                        make use of a large size (about 12m diameter) common unfurl able reflector
                                        antenna. In addition, NASA would provide engineering payloads for the
                                    mission, including a Payload Data Subsystem, High-rate Science Downlink System, GPS
                                    receivers and a Solid State Recorder. This would be the first dual frequency radar imaging mission in L-Band & S-Band
                                    using an advancedSweep SARtechnique to provide L & S band space-borne SAR
                                    data withhigh repeat cycle, high resolution, and larger swath,with
                                    capability offull-polar metric and interferometricmodes of operation.

It
                                    will provide a means of disentangling and clarifying spatially and temporally
                                    complex phenomena, ranging from ecosystem disturbances, to ice sheet collapse and
                                    natural hazards including earthquakes, tsunamis, volcanoes, and landslide This is
                                    expected to provide impetus to the fast maturing microwave remote sensing
                                    applications in geosciences. The precision interferometric orbits of the mission
                                    will enable in mapping few millimetres of deformations in the land surface. The
                                    selection of lower frequency bands will cater to the need for better
                                    characterization of vegetation, which is vital for global carbon stock estimation
                                    and monitoring of carbon fluxes from vegetation. Similarly, the selection of L- and
                                    S-band frequencies will enable characterizing targets beneath
                                    tree canopy and sub-surface features due to differential penetration of the signals
                                    in two frequency
                                    NISAR studying concepts for a Synthetic Aperture Radar mission is to determine Earth
                                    change inthree disciplines: ecosystems (vegetation and the carbon cycle),
                                        deformation (solid Earth studies),andcryosphere sciences (primarily as
                                        related to climatic drivers and effects on sea levelNISAR will acquire data over the Indian Coasts and monitor annual changes in the
                                    bathymetry along the deltaic regions.

The shoreline and the erosion accretion also
                                    will be monitored. The NISAR mission will observe sea ice characteristics over the
                                    seas surrounding India’s Antarctic polar stations, can be used to detect the marine
                                    oil spill and disseminate the spill location during accidental oil seepage for
                                    preventive measures. The NISAR observatory carries a 12m wide deployable mesh
                                    reflector mounted onto a deployable 9m boom developed by JPL which shall be used by
                                    both-JPL-NASA developed L-Band SAR payload system and ISRO developed S-Band SAR
                                    payload. The IRIS hosts the S-SAR and L-SAR tiles along with their electronics and
                                    data handling systems.

The spacecraft incorporates all the attitude and orbit
                                    control elements, power systems, thermal management system. JPL also will provide
                                    the LSAR Data Handling system, High-rate Science data Downlink System, GPS receivers
                                    and a Solid State Recorder. ISRO is responsible for providing the SSAR data handling
                                    system, High rate downlink system, spacecraft bus systems, the GSLV launch system
                                    and Mission Operations Related Services.A perfect blend of two cultures and a
                                        creation by two sets of craftsmen is what NISAR is. NISAR is being developed in three different phases as indicated below.

The SIT-2
                                    phase during which the SAR payloads and the Engineering Systems shall be
                                    independently developed in their respective soils. SIT-3 phase is when the SAR
                                    payload along with other related systems will get integrated to the Radar Instrument
                                    Structure and tested at JPL. Parallel activities of the spacecraft systems
                                    realization and testing is carried out at ISRO. The subsequent activities of
                                    integrating IRIS with the spacecraft and evaluating it as observatory is carried out
                                    at ISRO.

This phase is called the SIT-4 phase which is the on-going phase now. The
                                    IRIS is ready to be shipped from JPL and spacecraft is getting ready to receive its
                                    counterpart. The SIT-4 testing phase is going to be very elaborate and critical as
                                    the performance evaluation of the entire observatory is planned during this phase. The NISAR observatory shall be launched from Indian Soil in the first quarter of
                                    year 2024 and the science community is surely to benefit from the data generated.

MISSION PHASE

LAUNCH PHASE

The NISAR Observatory will be launched from Satish Dhawan Space
                                    Centre(SDSC) SHAR, Sriharikota on the southeast coast of the Indian peninsula, on
                                    the GSLV expendable launch vehicle contributed by ISRO. The target launch readiness
                                    date is January 2024. The launch sequence encompasses the time interval that takes
                                    the observatory from the ground, encapsulated in the launch vehicle fairing, to
                                    after separation, and ends with the completion of solar array deployment and the
                                    observatory in an Earth-pointed attitude and in two-way communication with the
                                    ground. The launch sequence is a critical event.

COMMISSIONING PHASE

The first 90 days after launch will be dedicated to
                                    commissioning, or in-orbit checkout (IOC), the objective of which is to prepare the
                                    observatory for science operations. Commissioning is divided into sub-phases of
                                    initial checkout (ISRO engineering systems and JPL
                                    engineering payload checkout), spacecraft checkout and instrument checkout. Philosophically, the sub-phases are designed as a step-by-step build up in
                                    capability to full observatory operations, beginning with the physical deployment of
                                    all deployable parts (notably the boom and radar antenna, but not including the
                                    solar arrays which are deployed during launch phase), checking out the engineering
                                    systems, turning on the radars and testing them independently and then conducting
                                    joint tests with both radars operating. SCIENCE OPERATIONS PHASE

The science operations phase begins at the end of commissioning
                                    and extends for three years and contains all data collection required to achieve the
                                    L1 science objectives.

During this phase, the science orbit will be maintained via
                                    regular maneuvers, scheduled to avoid or minimize conﬂicts with science
                                    observations. Extensive calibration and validation (CalVal) activities will take
                                    place throughout the first 5 months, with yearly updates of 1-month duration. The
                                    observation plan for both L- and S-band instruments, along with engineering
                                    activities (e.g., maneuvers, parameter updates, etc.), will be generated pre-launch
                                    via frequent coordination between JPL and ISRO. This plan is called the reference
                                    mission; the science observations alone within that reference mission is called the
                                    reference observation plan (ROP).

The schedule of science observations will be
                                    driven by a variety of inputs, including L- and S-band target maps, radar mode
                                    tables, and spacecraft and ground-station constraints and capabilities. This
                                    schedule will be determined by JPL’s mission planning team, and the project will
                                    endeavour to ﬂy the reference mission, which includes these science observations
                                    exactly as planned pre-launch (accommodating for small timing changes based on the
                                    actual orbit). Read More about NISAR

More Details

Space Science ResearchHome/
                                Activities /Science

Introduction

ISRO has its origins in space sciences. ISRO’s Space science programme started
                                        with studies of upper atmosphere using sounding rockets.

The saga is continuing
                                        with scientific missions like AstroSat, Mars Missions, Chandrayaan missions
                                        followed by Solar and other planetary missions. Indian space programme encompasses research in multiple areas like astronomy,
                                        astrophysics, planetary and earth sciences, atmospheric sciences and theoretical
                                        physics supported by scientific balloons, sounding rockets, space platforms and
                                        ground-based facilities. Important Science Missions

Indian Space Science Data Center (ISSDC)

ISRO Centres
                                                involved in the Space Science Research

Launchers or Launch Vehicles are used to carry spacecraft to space. India has three active operational launch vehicles: Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV), Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV), Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle Mk-III (LVM3).

Overview

PSLV is configured with four variants like 6,4,2 solid rocket strap-on motors& core alone versions. Variants will be chosen based on the payload weights & orbit to be accomplished. PSLV has been a versatile launch vehicle deployed for launching all the three types of payloads viz. Earth Observation, Geo-stationary and Navigation.

It has got highest success rate and considered as work horse of ISRO. GSLV with indigenous Cryogenic Upper Stage has enabled the launching up to 2 tonne class of communication satellites. The LVM3 is the next generation launch vehicle capable of launching 4 tonne class of communication satellites and 10 tonne class of payloads to LEOs. The vehicle was developed with completely indigenized technologies including the C25 cryo stage.

The launch vehicle has a track record of all successful launches even from the first development flight. The Human rated LVM3 is identified as the launch vehicle for Gaganyaan mission, which is named as HRLV. The Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV) is being developed with complete indigenous technologies to meet the small satellite launch market on demand driven basis

In order to achieve high accuracy in placing satellites into their orbits, a combination of accuracy, efficiency, power and immaculate planning are required. ISRO's Launch Vehicle Programme spans numerous centres.

Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre, located in Thiruvananthapuram, is responsible for the design and development of launch vehicles. Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre and ISRO Propulsion Complex, located at Valiamala and Mahendragiri respectively, develop the liquid and cryogenic stages for these launch vehicles. Satish Dhawan Space Centre, SHAR, is the space port of India and is responsible for integration of launchers. It houses two operational launch for launching ISRO's launch vehicles.

Polar
                                                Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV)

Geosynchronous
                                                Satellite Launch Vehicle
                                                (GSLV)

Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle Mark III(LVM3)

Sounding Rockets



Human Rated Launch Vehicle(HRLV)

Small Satellite Launch Vehicle(SSLV)

Reusable
                                                Launch
                                                Vehicle - Technology Demonstrator (RLV-TD)

Scramjet Engine - TD



SLV-3

ASLV

In order to fulfil vision and service goals, the Department of space has been developing mainly
                      the satellites for communication, earth observation, scientific, navigation and meteorological
                      purposes. Communication
                                Satellites



Earth Observation
                                Satellites



Scientific
                                Spacecraft



Navigation Satellites



Experimental Satellites



Small Satellites



Student Satellites

Satellite Communication Applications

A fleet of commercial communication satellites, are operating over India with communication transponders in C-band, Extended C-band, Ku-band and S-band. These transponders support the services like television, telecommunication, radio networking, strategic communication and societal applications. The prominent users of the transponders are BSNL, Doordarshan, All India Radio, strategic govt. users, public sector units, private VSAT operators, DTH and TV operators, banking and financial institutions, etc.

Under societal applications, ISRO/DOS has supported programmes like Telemedicine, Tele-education and Disaster Management Support (DMS) Programmes which are solely national development oriented with an aim to address specific requirements at different strata of the society. Television

INSAT has been a major catalyst for the expansion of television coverage in India. DOS has made available the required transponders through INSAT/GSAT satellites and through leased capacity to cater to the needs of television service. Radio Networking

Radio Networking (RN) through INSAT provides a reliable high-fidelity programme channels for National as well as Regional Networking.

AIR is utilising one C-band transponder of INSAT-3C for uplinking RN carriers across the country. Telecommunications

INSAT satellites have been traditionally supporting telecommunication applications for providing voice and data communications. Satellite links are the primary means of connectivity to remote and far flung regions of the country and they are the backup links for large number of terrestrial connectivity in the mainland. Very Small Aperture Terminals (VSATs) networks are designed to support all kinds of applications supporting video, voice and data, with a wide range of data rates from few kilobits per second (kbps) to 8 megabits per seconds (mbps).

A VSAT network comprises of a central hub and hundreds of terminals which are further interfaced to computers and other peripheral devices. The hub acts as a gateway with interface to external connectivity and several application servers. Rapid technological advancements and reduction in the cost of user equipment are increasing the popularity of VSAT network. A VSAT network works out to be a cheaper option while establishing a network to cover a wide geographical area, state wide or nationwide.

VSAT networks operate in C, Extended C and Ku-bands. Telemedicine

ISRO Telemedicine pilot project was started in the year 2001 as part of proof-of-concept demonstration programme, linking Apollo Hospital at Chennai with the Apollo Rural Hospital at Aragonda village in the Chittoor district of Andhra Pradesh. The Telemedicine technology involved the ICT based system consisting of customised medical software integrated with the computer hardware along with medical diagnostic instruments connected to the commercial VSAT at each location. The Telemedicine software consisted essentially of store-and-forward modules for Tele-radiology, Tele-cardiology and Tele-pathology purposes along with the video-conferencing facility.

As an on-going/continuous activity, tech support is provided to interested hospitals for conducting Continuing Medical Education (CME); operations of Hub are monitored and continuous follow-up is done with all users for optimum utilisation

Tele-education

'EDUSAT', India's first thematic satellite dedicated exclusively for educational services, was used extensively to cater to a wide range of interactive educational delivery modes like one-way TV broadcast, video conferencing, computer conferencing, web-based instructions, etc. EDUSAT had manifold objectives - to supplement the curriculum-based teaching, imparting effective teacher training, providing access to quality resource persons and new technologies, thus finally resulting in taking education to every nook and corner of India. EDUSAT provided connectivity to schools, colleges and higher levels of education and also supported non-formal education including development communication. EDUSAT Programme was implemented in three phases: pilot, semi-operational and operational phases.

Pilot projects were conducted during 2004 in Karnataka, Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh with 300 terminals. The experiences of pilot projects were adopted in semi-operational phase. During semi- operational phase, almost all the states and major national agencies were covered under EDUSAT programme. The networks implemented under EDUSAT programme comprise of two types of terminals, namely, Satellite Interactive Terminals (SITs) and Receive Only Terminals (ROTs).

Many states have expressed their keen interest to upgrade their networks and DOS is extending necessary technical assistance towards upgradation and expansion. Satellite Meteorology

The meteorological satellite data of INSAT is processed and disseminated by INSAT Meteorological Data Processing System (IMDPS) of India Meteorological Department (IMD) At present, INSAT/GSAT satellites carrying meteorological payloads are supporting weather forecasting services. IMDPS is capable to receive and process the data of all three existing geostationary meteorological satellites. The performance of the system has been maintained to the level of 98% operation efficiency (24x365 bases).

The output generated by the system is used for efficient and successful forecasting the major weather events, particularly major cyclones in the past. Satellite Aided Search and Rescue (SAS&R)

India is a member of the international COSPAS-SARSAT programme for providing distress alert and position location service through LEOSAR (Low Earth Orbit Search And Rescue) satellite system. Under this programme, India has established two Local User Terminals (LUTs), one at Lucknow and the other at Bengaluru. The Indian Mission Control Centre (INMCC) is located at ISTRAC, Bengaluru.

The system is operational from the past 24 years. Standard Time and Frequency Signal Dissemination Services

A Standard Time and Frequency Signal (STFS) Dissemination Service using INSAT system is provided by National Physical Laboratory. This service is available round-the-clock in a broadcast mode and is receivable on a set up consisting of receive antenna, a front-end converter, an FM demodulator and a microprocessor controlled signal decoder. The service consists of a train of 5 KHz bursts signal, which is frequency modulated on the carrier.

The timing service has a precision of better than one microsecond and accuracy of better than 20 microseconds. GPS Aided Geo Augmented Navigation (GAGAN)

The implementation of GAGAN has numerous benefits to the aviation sector in terms of fuel saving, saving in equipment cost, flight safety, increased air space capacity, efficiency, enhancement of reliability, reduction in workload for operators, coverage of oceanic area for air traffic control, high position accuracy, etc. Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) certified GAGAN for enroute services (RNP 0.1) on the December 30, 2013 and further certified for precision approach (APV 1) on April 21, 2015. With this, GAGAN signal is available for both civil Aviation and Non-Aviation users.

GAGAN Payloads are operational through GSAT-8, GSAT-10 and GSAT-15 satellites. Some of the benefits GAGAN is expected to bring for Civil Aviation sector are:

In addition to aviation sector, GAGAN is expected to bring benefits to other sectors like:

Some of the specific application initiatives are summarised below:

Surveying: (a) Karnataka forest department has used GAGAN dongle (a low end receiver devised to receive and process GAGAN) for forest surveys. (b) AAI is using GAGAN based surveys for airport survey requirements. (c) NRSC is using GAGAN for Ground Control Point Library recording. Railways: NRSC, along with Indian Railways, are experimenting on various GAGAN based applications, particularly in providing unmanned level crossing warning to drivers using GAGAN - BHUVAN applications. NRSC is doing pilot work on Train tracking using GPS-GAGAN.

Marine: DG, Shipping had a meeting at ISRO HQ and is in the process of assessing GAGAN for marine operations and are coordinating for the same. Space weather studies: GAGAN data is being used for space weather studies by SAC/ISAC and has also been used for developing regional IONO model for Asia Pacific region. Applications of IRNSS

Two types of services are envisaged by using IRNSS, namely Standard Positioning Service (SPS) which is provided to all the users and Restricted Service (RS), which is an encrypted service provided only to the authorised users. The IRNSS System will provide a position accuracy of better than 20 m in the primary service area.

Some applications of IRNSS are:

Disaster Management Support (DMS) Programme

The processed data and information were sent to Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and National Disaster Response Force (NDRF), in addition to uploading to Bhuvan and NDEM web portals of ISRO. The information derived from satellite data is shared among various international agencies for unifying the efforts and coordinating rescue operations. Early Warning Systems Development: Medium range flood forecast models were developed for the many river basins and operationally used in real-time in collaboration with Central Water Commission. Web-enabled spatial flood early warning system has been developed and being implemented in real-time during the monsoon periods.

An experimental early warning system for rainfall triggered landslides was developed and implemented along the pilgrimage route corridors leading to Gangotri, Badrinath and Kedarnath as well as along the Pithoragarh-Malpa route in Uttarakhand. The early warning is generated based on the statistical relation between the spatial (geological, morphological and terrain factors) and temporal (triggering factor; primarily long term rainfall events and the triggered landslides) controls of slope failure. Space Applications Centre (SAC), Ahmedabad has developed a model for thunderstorm predictions. Further, a prediction model for heat waves was developed in 2015.

Satellite derived information such as landuse/ land cover, vegetation cover, albedo, etc., are major influencing factors for the model. The experimental forecast output is overlaid on a GIS format with base data layers such as district boundaries, roads, railway lines, land use/land cover, etc. Both the forecasts were made available in MOSDAC and the links were given in Bhuvan and NDEM portals. National Database for Emergency Management (NDEM): NDEM version 2.0 was launched with improved features and functions on ISRO satellite based Virtual Private Network (VPN).

This portal consists of multi-scale geospatial database covering base, thematic, infrastructure, disaster specific products and satellite imagery along with a set of customised decision support tools. Generation of multi-scale geospatial services for 36 States / UTs at 1:50,000 scale, 209 out of 350 most vulnerable and multi hazard prone districts at 1:10,000 scale and high resolution satellite data for 210 towns has been completed. Satellite data derived value added disaster specific products (~209) covering 11 States covering disaster events in 2015 were hosted on NDEM portal. Mobile apps and user manuals were also uploaded in NDEM private and public portals for better utilisation of the services.

Simultaneously, NDEM Public portal is hosted on ISRO Bhuvan platform through internet connectivity. Seven regional training programmes for Central/State government departments (150 officers) have been organised across the country for the familiarisation of NDEM private and public portals for enabling the better utilisation of NDEM products and services. Aerial survey for large-scale mapping: Close contour flood plain mapping is being carried out using airborne LiDAR / LFDC data for use in flood inundation modelling and flood depth assessment. Communication Support: The satellite based satellite communication network, by interconnecting the National Emergency Operations Centre (NEOC) at MHA, the PMO, and the State Emergency Operations Centres (SEOCs) for Ministry of Home Affairs, is being maintained operational.

Satellite Aided Search and Rescue: The Satellite Aided Search and Rescue system which provides services to 7 neighbouring countries. Online Beacon registration system has been upgraded based on user requirements. International cooperation in DMS: ISRO has carried out the Lead Role in International Charter Operations during April-October 2015. During this period, ISRO managed 17 activations, published three communications and Universal Access was extended to 5 countries.

During 2015, satellite data support (28 scenes) were provided for 10 emergency requests from Vietnam, Pakistan, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Japan, Myanmar, Nepal and Taiwan for floods, oil spill, landslides and Typhoon disasters. Remote Sensing Applications

Remote sensing application projects at National, State and Local levels are being carried out through well established multi-pronged implementation architecture of National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS) in the country. Major ISRO Centres, namely, National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad and Space Application Centre (SAC), Ahmedabad spearhead all such applications development and implementation initiatives from ISRO/DOS. Regional Remote Sensing Centres (RRSCs) of NRSC, North-Eastern Space Application Centre (NE-SAC), Shillong and the State Remote Sensing Application Centres play a key role in implementation and reaching out to the grassroots for effective utilisation of the technology.

User Ministries of State and Central Government departments and other institutions play a major role in utilising remote sensing technology in their own departments. In addition, private sector, Non-Governmental Organisations and academia also utilise this technology in different developmental sectors of the country. National Land Use/Land Cover (LU/LC) mappingon 1:250,000: LU/LC assessment is made using semi-automated approach which includes automated processing of AWiFS quadrant data and classification using rule based approach. Water spread as well as snow cover information is generated though automated process.

Rule based data integration of temporal datasets was adopted to derive final LU/LC output. Crop Acreage and Production Estimation: The semi-physical spectral-spatial yield model was developed for various crops and provided to Mahalanobis National Crop Forecasting Centre (MNCFC) and required training is being imparted to MNCFC personnel for running the model and deriving planting date from time series NDVI data. Coordinated programme on Horticulture Assessment and Management using Geoinformatics (CHAMAN): This national level project has been taken up, with the major objectives of (i) area assessment and production forecasting of major horticultural crops in selected districts in India; (ii) geospatial applications for horticultural development and management planning; and (iii) detailed scientific field level studies for developing technology for crop identification, yield modelling and disease assessment. Temporal high-resolution data (LISS-IV and Cartosat-1) has been used for delineation of spatial extent of the crop of interest.

A mobile application
                                        'CHAMAN app' was developed to aid in faster and efficient collection of ground information, as well as in building geodatabase through Bhuvan platform. Cotton crop area mapping: Multi-temporal satellite (Landsat-8) data was classified and interpreted for cotton crop identification, discrimination and mapping for Wardha Taluka in Wardha district, Maharashtra. Land Use/Land Cover, forest, settlement, water bodies and ancillary data was used to mask the non-crop area. It was observed that around 17,900 ha area of study area was covered by cotton crop (21.4% of total geographical area).

The results were subsequently validated in the field. Indian Forest Cover Change Alert System (InFCCAS): A remote sensing based technique was developed for automated detection of forest cover loss of an area greater than 2 hectare for rapid annual monitoring. The forest pixels are identified on Resourcesat-2 AWiFS data (20 x 20 tiles) for Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Telangana, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal). Study on Sundarban mangrove system: The mangrove ecosystem of Sundarbans region plays an important ecological and socio-economical role in both India and Bangladesh.

The present study is aimed at analysing the impact of cyclone of varying intensity and at different period of phonological cycle on mangrove forests in Sundarbans region. MODIS time-series (2001-2011), Enhanced Vegetation Index (EVI) and Land Surface Temperature (LST) products were used to compute the MODIS Global Disturbance Index (MGDI). In the present study, instantaneous disturbance caused by the super cyclones was analysed using MGDI approach. The combined impact of 'SIDR' and 'Rashmi' was successfully captured by the MGDI images of 2008.

In case of
                                        'Aila', the disturbed area was reasonably less in comparison to the areas with higher EVI changes (-50% to -30%). The spatial extent of disturbance in each island was mapped, which can further be integrated on a temporal scale to generate spatio- temporal severity map. This will help forest management to identify chronically disturbed areas, which may have potential for biological invasion. Inventory and Monitoring of Glacial Lakes/Water Bodies: The project is being carried out at the behest of Central Water Commission.

The inventory of glacial lakes and water bodies was carried out for the year 2009 using IRS satellite data and monitoring in the months from June to October was completed for last four years (2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014). Similar activity for the year 2015 was taken up in June, 2015 for 477 glacial lakes and water bodies. Monthly monitoring reports are submitted. Assessment of Irrigation Potential Utilisation (I.P.U) using geospatial data: The study has been initiated in April 2015 to assess Irrigation Potential Utilisation (I.P.U) under Major & Medium (M&M) irrigation projects in Krishna basin using the geo-spatial data.

Temporal AWiFS data, canal network, project boundaries and LULC data available under various projects (India WRIS, SIS DP, NRC) are being utilised. The data bases such as basin, sub-basin boundaries, M&M projects, their canal network, river/ stream network and other base layers are being organised. Re-assessment of basin scale water resources using Space inputs: ISRO and Central Water Commission (CWC) jointly executed demonstrative pilot studies in Godavari and Brahmani- Baitarani river basins wherein Space based geo-spatial inputs were used to estimate basin-level mean annual water resources. Ministry of Water Resources recommended upscaling the study to other river basins of the country by regional offices of CWC.

CWC regional offices will carry out the study and NRSC will provide technical support and hand holding during the study execution. Monitoring of Gas Pipelines of Gas Authority of India Ltd (GAIL): GAIL has about 15,000 line km gas pipeline network in India. GAIL and ISRO have undertaken a joint project for studying feasibility of remote sensing, as an alternative/ complement to the helicopter survey, for monitoring the Right of Usage (ROU) of the pipeline for any physical encroachments. A pilot study has been carried out for “Dahej-Vemar-Vijaipur” pipeline segment of about 610 line km.

Results indicates that satellite remote sensing techniques (high resolution data) can be used to monitor the pipeline assets through periodic repeat coverage (say monthly) during the cloud-free season. A web application was also developed to demonstrate the usefulness and quick communication within the GAIL monitoring teams. Island Information System (IIS): Department of Border Management, Ministry of Home Affairs constituted a Task force for holistic development of Islands in Maritime zones of India, with participation of all concerned Ministries/ Departments/ Agencies. Towards this, ISRO has prepared a geospatial inventory of all islands using satellite images and developed an Island Information System.

A total of 1238 islands have been identified and reconciled by NRSC/ISRO, SOI, NHO and RGI. The Island Information System (IIS) has been shared with different ministries and departments. Monitoring of Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP) watersheds using geospatial technologies: Bhuvan - SRISHTI, a Web based GIS application (Geoportal), has been developed to enable monitoring and evaluation of IWMP watersheds, using satellite remote sensing and sample field data (collected using mobile application). This Geoportal would facilitate monitoring and evaluation of all IWMP watersheds for 10 states and 50 identified districts in 28 states.

Bhuvan - DRISHTI, an android based interface tool, has been developed for field data capture of the development activities undertaken for the IWMP Projects and includes a facility to upload photos to Bhuvan IWMP Server. Space-based Information Support for Decentralised Planning (SIS-DP): The project aims at providing web based spatial information comprising of ortho-rectified satellite image, thematic and field data, resource maps, cadastral maps, administrative boundaries, infrastructure layers, climate and socioeconomic data which will act as input for Decentralised Planning at Panchayat level. The project is being executed by respective State Remote Sensing Applications Centres (SRSAC) under the technical guidance and financial support from Overlay of cadastre maps over high resolution satellite image has been completed for 5 States (AP, Telangana, Haryana, Assam and Kerala) and 2 Districts of West Bengal; Bhuvan-Panchayats portal version - 2.0 and Mobile app for Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRI) asset data collection has been demonstrated for operational use. Training on decentralised planning and use of SIS-DP data for planning is being implemented with PRIs through Bhuvan Panchayat.

Snow and Glacier Studies: It is a joint initiative of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change and Department of Space. Retreat/advance for 73 glaciers spread over different parts of the Himalayan region were estimated using CORONA (1965) and LISS-III (2001) images. Snow cover Atlas of the Bhutan was completed. Spatial modelling of fluoride contamination in ground water:

The spatial modeling has been for fluoride distribution in ground water using knowledge guided models, data driven models and the combination of both.

Fluoride prediction maps generated using hybrid neuro-fuzzy integrated approach compared favourably among the four mathematical models used, namely, weighted overlay, fuzzy overlay, artificial neural network and hybrid neuro-fuzzy models for prediction of fluoride in ground water. Results were validated with field data. Groundwater storage assessment coupling hydromorphology with lithology: The standard procedure of ground water resource estimation is based on the specific yield parameters of each rock type (lithology) derived through pumping test analysis. However, terrain conditions in the form of geomorphological variations have an important bearing on the net ground water recharge.

An attempt was made to use both lithology and geomorphology as input variables to estimate the recharge from different sources in each lithology unit influenced by the geomorphic conditions (lith-geom) season wise separately. Surface Energy Balance over Agro-ecosystems using Large Aperture Scintillometry: The unique advantage of Scintillometry is its ability to calculate areal averaged sensible heat fluxes over spatial distances comparable to those observed by satellites. The LAS system was set up in 2014 at the agricultural research farm of Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi. The LAS measures atmospheric turbulence and heat flux over path lengths between 250 m and 6000 m.

The LAS was augmented with an Automatic Weather Station (AWS) having sensors of net radiometer, pyranometer, anemometer (2 levels), humidity and temperature probes (2 heights) and a soil heat flux plate at 10 cm depth. The 5 min fluxes of net radiation (Rn), sensible heat (H), latent heat (LE) and soil heat (G) fluxes were averaged at hourly intervals. All the fluxes were integrated over the day to analyse their seasonal pattern. Using H and LE daily integrated fluxes, daily values of evaporative fraction, EF = LE/ (H+LE) are calculated and analysed for their seasonal pattern.

Monitoring and Assessment of ecosystem process in North Western Himalayas:

For sustainable environmental development, making disaster resilient society and improved livelihood in the North Western Himalayan (NWH) region, an interdisciplinary research project on “Monitoring and Assessment of Ecosystem Process in NWH” is being carried out at IIRS, Dehradun involving large number of research organisations with several sub-themes as given hereunder:

NATIONAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENT STUDIES (NICES):

Realising the need for a comprehensive information base to build long term data records on various Essential Climate Variables (ECVs) for environmental and climate studies with inter and intra-departmental linkages, ISRO formulated the National Information System for Climate and Environment Studies (NICES). The mandate of NICES is to build an information base for climate change impact assessment and mitigation. Earth Observation Application Sciences

The R&D in various field of EO is a continuous endeavour of ISRO centres. Space Applications Centre of ISRO is involved in applications of remote sensing and GIS technology in geosciences and executes several projects for societal benefits.

Some of the major thrust research areas are related to coastal and marine geosciences, geodynamics, geo-hazards, mineral, hydrocarbon and geo-archaeological exploration. Production forecasting of important agricultural crops using satellite remote sensing data initiated under the project “Crop Acreage and Production Estimation” by Space Applications Centre and carried out over a period of two decades at the behest of Ministry of Agriculture, Govt. of India (MOA). Subsequently a more inclusive model FASAL (Forecasting agricultural output using Space, Agro-meteorology and Land based observations) was initiated in 2007-08. Human activities contribute to climate change by causing changes in Earth's atmosphere in the amounts of greenhouse gases, aerosols (small particles), and cloudiness.

Climate change forms one of the most important global environmental challenges, with implications for food production, water supply, health, energy, etc. It is essential to study the impacts of climate change and thereby suggest mitigation measures. Goal of space based global change observation, together with other observations and studies, is to provide a sound scientific basis for developing national and international policy relating to natural and human induced changes in the Earth System. Oceans occupy almost 3/4th of the surface of our planet.

They have profound impact on climate and weather. The current research includes Advanced Ocean State Forecast (AOSF) using numerical models and space-borne observations, Ocean Process Studies, and development of Data Assimilation (DA) techniques. The Ocean contains thousands of microscopic, free floating, single-celled plants called“phytoplankton”capable of making their own food by harvesting the energy from sunlight, carbon dioxide and nutrients present in the upper well-lit layers of the ocean. This process known as photosynthesis also liberates oxygen and makes possible all animal life in the ocean.

Phytoplankton are the oceanic equivalents of land plants and forms the basis of marine food chain. In addition, they play an important role in pulling the carbon dioxide from the atmosphere by exporting the dead cells to the ocean interior and bottom sediments. The study of Atmospheric Sciences is a major programme. ISRO centre develops state of art techniques for the analysis and forecasting of the weather and climate from regional to global scales using various satellite data.

The space based inputs are used by IMD and other agencies for their forecasts. Cryospheric studies on the earth surface include inventory, dynamics, changes, and interaction with hydrosphere, atmosphere etc. of snow, ice cover on land, sea ice and permafrost. For the last more than two and half decades ISRO has been contributing to the development of methods/techniques for extraction and dissemination of reliable and quick information pertaining to polar and Himalayan cryosphere using data from Indian Remote Sensing Satellites. ISRO carries out studies related to land hydrological modeling and applications.

It involves retrieval of hydro-meteorological parameters from satellite and modeling of Hydrological Processes from field to National scale. Timely and reliable assessment of available water resources through satellites and models provide important input to devise strategies and water management in the country. The research and development has been the backbone of the Department of space. DOS

                has been conducting various research programmes or projects over the decades to fulfil its needs.Links to the web-pages that provide the details of R&D activities on various aspects are compiled here.

For future missions, DOS has set sight on advanced technologies like high

                        power SSPAs and output filters, reconfigurable high throughput satellites, multiport amplifiers

                        for power reconfiguration, multi beam satellite with higher number of beams, unfurlable and

                        reconfigurable antenna etc. R&D for Earth Observation Payloads:

Additionally, various Centres of DoS are involved in R&D activities. The following

                pages provide a glimpse of the same. URSC, Bengaluru is involved inScience, R&D in Space Astronomy.

Space Physics Laboratory, Thriruvanthapuram is engaed inAtmospheric, Space, and Planetary Researchunder Research themes and

                Projects. It also runsINSWIM:Indian Network

                for Space Weather Impact Monitoring. IIRS conducts R&D inGeo-information (GI) science and

                    earth observation

PRL is involved inresearchin the fields of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Atomic, Molecular & Optical Physics,

                Geoscienes, Planetory Sciences, Space &Atomospheric Science and Thoeretical Physics. IIST focusses onResearchinAerospace, Avionics,

                  Chemistry, Earth and Space Sciences, Humanities, Mathematics and Physics.

SMALL SATELLITE LAUNCH VEHICLE (SSLV)

About the Launch Vehicle

Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV) is a 3 stage Launch Vehicle configured with three Solid

                            Propulsion Stages and liquid propulsion based Velocity Trimming Module (VTM) as a terminal

                            stage. SSLV is 2m in diameter and 34m in length with lift off weight of ~120 tonnes. SSLV is

                            capable of launching ~500kg satellite in 500km planar orbit from SDSC/SHAR. The key features of SSLV are Low cost, with low turn-around time, flexibility in accommodating

                            multiple satellites, Launch on demand feasibility, minimal launch infrastructure requirements,

                            etc.

VEHICLE CONFIGURATION

PAYLOAD CAPABILITY

SSLV stages Technical Specifications

Stage 1: SS1

Stage 2: SS2

Stage 3: SS3

Velocity Trimming Module (VTM)

Velocity Trimming Module based on 50N Bipropellant Thrusters with 8 nos. of 50N thrusters for RCS and 8 nos.

                                                        of 50N axial thrusters of Velocity addition. LVM3(Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle Mk III)Home

LVM3 will be
																			capable of placing the 4 tonne class
																			satellites of the GSAT series into
																			Geosynchronous Transfer Orbits. The powerful cryogenic
																			stage of LVM3 enables it to place
																			heavy payloads into Low Earth Orbits of 600
																			km altitude. The C25 is powered by
																			CE-20, India's largest cryogenic engine,
																			designed and developed by the Liquid
																			Propulsion Systems Centre.

LVM3 uses two
																			S200 solid rocket boosters to provide the
																			huge amount of thrust required for lift off. The S200 was developed at Vikram Sarabhai
																			Space Centre. The L110 liquid stage
																			is powered by two Vikas engines designed and
																			developed at the Liquid Propulsion Systems
																			Centre. LVM3 is configured as a three stage vehicle with two
										solid
										strap-on motors (S200), one liquid core stage (L110) and a high thrust cryogenic
										upper
										stage (C25).

The S200 solid motor is among the largest solid boosters in the
										world with
										204 tonnes of solid propellant. The liquid L110 stage uses a twin liquid engine
										configuration
										with 115 tonnes of liquid propellant, while the C25 Cryogenic upper stage is
										configured with
										the fully indigenous high thrust cryogenic engine (CE20) with a propellant
										loading of 28 tons. The overall length of the vehicle is 43.5 m with a gross lift-off weight of 640
										tonnes and a 5m-diameter payload fairing. . LVM3 is the new heavy lift launch vehicle of
										ISRO for achieving a 4000 kg spacecraft launching
										capability to GTO (Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit) in a cost effective manner.

LVM3 is a three stage launch vehicle consisting of two solid propellant S200
										strap-ons
										and core stages comprising of L110 liquid stage, C25 cryogenic stage, the
										equipment bay (EB) and the Encapsulated assembly (EA). EA comprises of the spacecraft, Payload Adaptor (PLA) and the Payload fairing
										(PF). With a lift-off mass of 640 tons, this 43.5 m
										tall three-stage launch vehicle gives ISRO full self-reliance in launching
										heavier communication satellites that weigh up to 4000 kg in GTO. The vehicle takes off with the simultaneous ignition of the two S200 boosters.

The core stage (L110) is ignited at about 113s through the flight,
										during the firing of the S200 stages. Both S200 motors burn for about 134s and
										the separation occur at 137s. The payload fairing is separated at an altitude
										of 115 km and at about 217s during L110 firing. The L110 burnout and separation
										and C25 ignition occur at 313s.

The spacecraft is injected into a GTO (Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit) orbit of
										180x36000 km at a nominal time of 974s. More Details

More Details

November 23, 2022

The primary mandate of HSFC is to spearhead ISRO's Gaganyaan programme through co-ordinated
                        efforts and focus all the activities that are carried out in other ISRO centres, research labs
                        in India, Indian academia and Industries towards accomplishing the mission. HSFC, as the lead
                        Centre for Human space flight activities conforms to high standards of reliability and human
                        safety in undertaking R&D activities in new technology areas, such as life support systems,
                        Human Factors Engineering, Bioastronautics, Crew training and Human rating & certification. These areas would constitute important components for future sustained human space flight
                        activities like rendezvous and docking, space station building and interplanetary collaborative
                        manned missions to Moon/Mars and near-earth asteroids.

More Details

Gaganyaan

Gaganyaan project envisages demonstration of human spaceflight capability by launching crew of 3
                    members to an orbit of 400 km for a 3 days mission and bring them back safely to earth, by landing
                    in Indian sea waters. The project is accomplished through an optimal strategy by considering inhouse expertise, experience
                    of Indian industry, intellectual capabilities of Indian academia & research institutions along
                    with cutting edge technologies available with international agencies. The pre-requisites for
                    Gaganyaan mission include development of many critical technologies including human rated launch
                    vehicle for carrying crew safely to space, Life Support System to provide an earth like environment
                    to crew in space, crew emergency escape provision and evolving crew management aspects for training,
                    recovery and rehabilitation of crew. Various precursor missions are planned for demonstrating the Technology Preparedness Levels before
                    carrying out the actual Human Space Flight mission.

These demonstrator missions include Integrated Air Drop Test (IADT), Pad Abort Test (PAT) and Test
                    Vehicle (TV) flights. Safety and reliability of all systems will be proven in unmanned missions
                    preceding manned mission. Human rated LVM3 - HLVM3

LVM3 rocket - The well proven and reliable heavy lift launcher of ISRO, is identified as the launch
                    vehicle for Gaganyaan mission. It consists of solid stage, liquid stage and cryogenic stage.

All
                    systems in LVM3 launch vehicle are re-configured to meet human rating requirements and christened
                    Human Rated LVM3. HLVM3 will be capable of launching the Orbital Module to an intended Low Earth
                    Orbit of 400 km. HLVM3 consists of Crew Escape System (CES) powered by a set of quick acting, high burn rate solid
                    motors which ensures that Crew Module along with crew is taken to a safe distance in case of any
                    emergency either at launch pad or during ascent phase. Orbital Module



Orbital Module (OM) that will be Orbiting Earth comprises of Crew Module (CM) and Service Module
                    (SM).

OM is equipped with state-of-the-art avionics systems with adequate redundancy considering
                    human safety. CM is the habitable space with Earth like environment in space for the crew. It is of double walled
                    construction consisting of pressurized metallic Inner Structure and unpressurised External Structure
                    with Thermal Protection System (TPS). It houses the crew interfaces, human centric products, life
                    support system, avionics and deceleration systems.

It is also designed for re-entry to ensure safety
                    of the crew during descent till touchdown. SM will be used for providing necessary support to CM while in orbit. It is an unpressurized
                    structure containing thermal system, propulsion system, power systems, avionics systems and
                    deployment mechanisms. New technologies being developed for Gaganyaan

Human safety is of paramount importance in Gaganyaan mission.

In order to ensure the same, various new
                  technologies comprising of Engineering systems and Human centric systems are being developed and
                  realised. Crew training for Gaganyaan

Astronaut Training Facility established in Bengaluru caters to Classroom training, Physical Fitness
                  training, Simulator training and Flight suit training. Training modules cover academic courses,
                  Gaganyaan Flight Systems, Micro-gravity familiarization through Parabolic Flights, Aero-medical
                  training, Recovery & Survival training, mastering of Flight Procedures and training on Crew
                  Training Simulators. Aero medical training, Periodical flying practice and Yoga are also included as
                  part of the training.

Milestones achieved so far





Test vehicle for characterisation of Crew Escape System ready at SDSC



Major milestones planned



More Details

Reusable Launch Vehicle

The cost of access to space is the major deterrent in space exploration and space utilisation. A
                        reusable launch vehicle is the unanimous solution to achieve low cost, reliable and on-demand
                        space access. Reusable Launch Vehicle-Technology Demonstration (RLV-TD)Programme is
                        planned as a series of technology demonstration missions that have been considered as a first
                        step towards realising a Two Stage To Orbit (TSTO) fully reusable vehicle. A Winged RLV-TD has
                        been configured to act as a flying test bed to evaluate various technologies using air breathing
                        propulsion.

These technologies will be developed in phases through a series of experimental
                        flights. RLV-TD HEX-01 Mission :

ISRO accomplished its maiden RLV-TD HEX-01 mission on May 23, 2016  from SDSC
                        SHAR and successfully demonstrated the critical technologies for design and flight testing
                        of re-entry vehicles. However,it was a suborbital flight and designed to land on sea. RLV Landing Experiment (RLV-LEX) :

The major challenges of RLV technology has been successfully accomplished by ISRO in our
                        previous missions.

However, one of the critical technologies to be demonstrated is approach
                        and autonomous landing on a runway. In order to acquire end-to-end RLV technology 
                        capability, this milestone has to be achieved before the RLV ORE mission. For this, a Landing Experiment is planned (LEX)

In LEX, the RLV will be carried using a helicopter to an altitude of 3-5 km and released at a
                        distance of approximately 4-5 km ahead of the runway with a horizontal velocity. After the
                        release, the RLV glides, navigates towards the runway and carries out a conventional 
                        autonomous landing with a landing with a landing gear.

This is planned in a Defence air field near 
                        Chitradurga in Karnataka. RLV Orbital re-entry Experiment (ORE)

Now ISRO is working on ORE. In ORE, a wing body called Orbital Re-entry vehicle (ORV)
                      will be taken to an orbit by an ascent vehicle derived from the existing GSLV and PSLV
                      stages and stay in orbit for a stipulated period, re-enter and land in a runway
                      autonomously with a landing gear. Air Breathing Propulsion

Air Breathing Propulsion provides a technological key for low cost space transportation system.

They eliminate the use of oxidizer being carried by making use of the atmospheric air and there by significantly improve the payload fraction. Air breathing propulsion project is responsible for planning and execution of research, development of flight testing of Air Breathing
                Propulsion Systems. These involve theoretical computation and experimental evaluation of thermo structural and reactive fluid dynamics of 
                turbo-ramjet-scramjet engines and associated technologies. Successful flight demonstration of Scramjet mode of propulsion was cost effectively carried out with 
                    ATVD02- Scramjet Characterisation flight in 2016.

Further plans are for the development of an autonomous vehicle powered by Scramjet engine capable for accelerating for a period of 250s. HAVA - Hyper Sonic Air Breathing Vehicle with Air Integration Systems:-Current focus of the project is on the development of critical technologies for this HAVA mission Viz. Flowduct, fuel injection struct Air intake cowl opening mechanism, Ramps
                     fluid store and feed system, Pilot Flame Ignition System, Navigation / Guidance and Control System, Elevon/ Rudder Control System and Avionics/
                     Instrumentation System. Further it is planned to develop Air Breathing Powered (TBCC based Engine) TSTO vehicle.

U R Rao Satellite Centre , Bengaluru is engaged in research and development in various facets of science and engineering related to spacecraft technology like astronomy,

	  electronics, thermal, mechanical, material science, computer science etc. Many URSC developments are taken up by the academic 

	  and research and development institutions through ISRO sponsored research (RESPOND) program. ISRO also has collaborative research and development programs

	  with academic institutions/universities through ISRO-cells. URSC undertake regular Research Fellows to carry out research

	  work in relevant areas.

Research Fellows are encouraged to register for doctorate program in leading academic institutes. The research activities 

	  carried out in URSC are regularly published in various national and international peer reviewed journals. In addition, URSC also has its own in-house periodicals

	  like "Journal of Spacecraft Technology". The Space Astronomy Team  along with Space Science Instrumentation Facility (SSIF) at U R Rao Satellite Centre  (URSC) is involved in scientific research and instrumentation, in the areas of astronomy and astrophysics, solar physics, planetary science, and space weather.

In addition to this, SSIF is setup to assist external colleges, universities and institutions in the design, development and realization of space-worthy science payloads. This shall be carried out in active collaboration with the proposing scientist(s). The primary responsibility of space astronomy team for SSIF is to analyse the scientific and technological requirements of identified proposals, converting the scientific requirement into instrumentation, help them developing the laboratory model of the payload, and oversee the realisation of associated Qualification and Flight payloads at SSIF. Through these activities, space astronomy team provides domain expertise support for developing new scientific payload from laboratory model to the qualification and flight model.

This involves simulation and modelling guidance, student training and establishing commonly required major test systems and science calibration facilities. To facilitate the external institutions, space astronomy team has the resources like simulation expertise, basic infrastructure (1000 class clean room, and updated astronomy and electronics laboratory) and system design expert. Space astronomy team has so far developed and flown various scientific payload experiments like Gamma Ray Burst (GRB) Experiment, Indian X-ray Astronomy Experiment (IXAE), Solar X-ray Spectrometer (SOXS), High Energy X-ray Spectrometer (HEX), Chandrayaan-1 Soft X-ray Spectrometer, Scanning Sky Monitor (SSM) and Geostationary RAdiation SPectrometer( GRASP) in various missions. The team is currently involved in the realization of the following scientific payloads:a) Chandrayaan-2 Large Area X-ray Spectrometer (CLASS) on board Chandrayaan-2 orbiter andb) Solar Low Energy X-ray Spectrometer (SoLEXS) & High Energy L1 orbiting X-ray Spectrometer (HEL1OS) on-board Aditya-L1 Mission

Under the SSIF program, the following activities are being carried out:a) Design and development of the polarimetry package for the Visible Emission Line Coronagraph (VELC) on board Aditya L1 andb) Design development of detector package of Solar Ultra-violet Imaging Telescope (SUIT) onboard Aditya L1.

The integration and calibration activities are also carried out at space astronomy team under the same program.c) An university satellite for the IIT Madras named Space based Proton Electron Energy Detector (SPEED) is also in progress. This website belongs to U R Rao Satellite Centre ( Formerly known as ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC) ),Department of Space, Government of India.It is designed, developed and hosted by U R Rao Satellite Centre, Bengaluru.© Copyright  2025. All rights reserved.For queries, please contact Public Relations Officer :pro[at]ursc[dot]gov[dot]inBest viewed inMozilla Firefox 68.0, Google Chrome 80.0, Internet Explorer 11.0and above

The initiatives like Chandrayaan-1, Megha-Tropiques, CRABEX, PLANEX, SRE science experiments etc., would provide exciting

 opportunities to attract young research scientists and students to space science arena. Special effort is being made to organise training workshops, create

 special awareness and fellowships etc., to enable participation by students and scientists from universities and academic institutions.

With the initiation

 of these major space science missions and their realisation, considerable interest and expertise have been generated. This website belongs to U R Rao Satellite Centre ( Formerly known as ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC) ),Department of Space, Government of India.It is designed, developed and hosted by U R Rao Satellite Centre, Bengaluru.© Copyright  2025. All rights reserved.For queries, please contact Public Relations Officer :pro[at]ursc[dot]gov[dot]inBest viewed inMozilla Firefox 68.0, Google Chrome 80.0, Internet Explorer 11.0and above

Satellite building is a complex activity involving hundreds of thousands of interfaces. A Satellite is a product of multi disciplinary effort.

The types and varieties of activities involved in satellite building would be difficult to comprehend from a common view point. In order to give a fleeting insight into various subsystems / parts of a spacecraft and its complex assembly and integration activity to the student community paper modeling is a simple but effective approach. The following table gives paper model of some of the satellites made by URSC. Read the instructions carefully and do it yourself.

This website belongs to U R Rao Satellite Centre ( Formerly known as ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC) ),Department of Space, Government of India.It is designed, developed and hosted by U R Rao Satellite Centre, Bengaluru.© Copyright  2025. All rights reserved.For queries, please contact Public Relations Officer :pro[at]ursc[dot]gov[dot]inBest viewed inMozilla Firefox 68.0, Google Chrome 80.0, Internet Explorer 11.0and above

Starting with ground based and balloon borne experiments in the 1940s, the Indian space science research activities were actually initiated with the launching of sounding rockets from the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) in 1963 to measure the equatorial electrojet parameters. Since then large number of rocket and balloon borne experiments have provided new data on upper atmospheric phenomena, cosmic rays and energetic x-ray and gamma rays. With the advent of satellite era, scientific experimental payloads have been launched starting from the first Indian satellite Aryabhata.

This website belongs to U R Rao Satellite Centre ( Formerly known as ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC) ),Department of Space, Government of India.It is designed, developed and hosted by U R Rao Satellite Centre, Bengaluru.© Copyright  2025. All rights reserved.For queries, please contact Public Relations Officer :pro[at]ursc[dot]gov[dot]inBest viewed inMozilla Firefox 68.0, Google Chrome 80.0, Internet Explorer 11.0and above

The space exhibition comprising of a display of satellite systems, scaled models of satellites and allied information on satellite technologies

is established for the benefit of school children/college community. Visits from various high schools and colleges are permitted (Refercontact us/  student visit  for details) with a view to rekindle  scientific temperament in the young minds and also to motivate them to take up a career, in the challenging yet exciting area of space. This website belongs to U R Rao Satellite Centre ( Formerly known as ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC) ),Department of Space, Government of India.It is designed, developed and hosted by U R Rao Satellite Centre, Bengaluru.© Copyright  2025.

All rights reserved.For queries, please contact Public Relations Officer :pro[at]ursc[dot]gov[dot]inBest viewed inMozilla Firefox 68.0, Google Chrome 80.0, Internet Explorer 11.0and above

The Institute has a multi-disciplinary and problem oriented research agenda that focuses on technology development as well as land/ocean/atmosphere applications in the area of geo-information (GI) science and earth observation. From the perspective of technology development, commendable research in GI science is pursued at the Institute, like advanced image processing techniques, digital photogrammetry, microwave remote sensing, radar interferometry, hyperspectral remote sensing, LiDAR data processing, spatial data mining, spatial data modelling, spatial decision support systems, etc. On the applications front, the Institute has proven its leadership in the country in developing key societal applications, like watershed management, ground water exploration, modelling urban dynamics, coastal zone management, irrigation water management, biodiversity characterisation, geo-hazards monitoring, assessment and modelling, to name a few. IIRS is involved in a number of research projects of ISRO/ DOS such as Earth Observation Application Mission, Disaster Management Support, National Carbon Project (ISRO-GBP) and other Mission Projects such as SARAL-ALTIKA & INSAT INSAT-3D Utilization Projects etc.

In addition to these ISRO/ DOS projects, IIRS scientists have significantly contributed in the research activity through various Technology Development Programmes (TDPs) and other in-house research projects. IIRS is publishing about 60-70 peer reviewed research publication annually in various national and International high impact research journals. Some of the major ongoing research areas are:

IIRS is a recognized centre for carrying out research leading to Ph.D. by Forest Research Institute (Deemed University), Dehradun; Andhra University, Visakhapatnam; University of Pune, Pune; and IIT, Roorkee. As a part of its policy to promote research in the field of remote sensing and geoinformatics, the Institute provides opportunities to the interested candidates for pursuing doctoral research leading to Ph.D.

Degree from a recognized university. Keeping in view the long tradition of academic excellence, the following institutional goal is laid down for doctoral research:

“To develop deep and broad understanding of the subject and to inculcate abilities for independently undertaking research in the chosen field of remote sensing and geoinformatics technology and applications.”

Department of Space, Government of India

4, Kalidas Road, Dehradun - 248 001 (India)

Tel: + 91 -135 - 2524399 Fax:+ 91 -135 - 2741987

admissions[at]iirs[dot]gov[dot]in

ppeg[at]iirs[dot]gov[dot]in

dean[at]iirs[dot]gov[dot]in

dlp[at]iirs[dot]gov[dot]in

elearning[at]iirs[dot]gov[dot]in

director[at]iirs[dot]gov[dot]in

Copyright © 2025 - All rights reserved – Official website of Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Indian Space Research Organisation, Government of India

Note: Content on this website is published and managed by Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Indian Space Research Organisation

Dr. Vikram Ambalal Sarabhai

Vikram Ambalal Sarabhai, the Founder of PRL and a distinguished cosmic-ray and space scientist, is.... Prof.

Anil Bhardwaj

Prof. Anil Bhardwaj received his M.Sc. from Lucknow University (1987) and Ph.D. from IIT .... Dr. Vikram Ambalal Sarabhai

Vikram Ambalal Sarabhai, the Founder of PRL and a distinguished cosmic-ray and space scientist, is....

Prof. Anil Bhardwaj

Prof. Anil Bhardwaj received his M.Sc. from Lucknow University (1987) and Ph.D. from IIT ....

चिह्नित करना: Ear-mark

गुजराती: નિશાની કરવી

अर्थ: कोई विशेषता या पहचान करने की सुविधा

उपयोग: इस कार को क्लासिक माने जाने की सभी विशेषताएं मौजूद हैं।

"भारतीय साहित्य और संस्कृति को हिंदी की देन बड़ी महत्त्वपूर्ण है।	"



ADecrease font size.AReset font size.AIncrease font size. The scientific programs of the Centre are guided by the needs of the region and are reviewed yearly by NESAC Society and GC.

During the current year, NESAC has taken up and completed several projects covering the NER states in the areas of natural resources management, infrastructure planning, health, education, satellite communication and atmospheric science research. The centre has implemented a number of application projects sponsored by user agencies in the region, National/regional projects funded/coordinated by ISRO-DOS Centres, research and developmental projects under Earth Observations Applications Mission (EOAM), Satellite Communications (SATCOM) programs, Disaster Management Support (DMS) program under the North Eastern Regional node for Disaster Risk Reduction (NER-DRR) and Space &Atmospheric Science Programs under the Atmospheric Science Program (ASP) and ISRO Geosphere Biosphere Program (IGBP). LAST UPDATEDJuly 22, 2025 - 4:32 pm

SITE VISITORS

© 2009-2025 NESAC

ISTRAC

In Indian space programme, ISRO Telemetry Tracking and Command Network (ISTRAC) plays a key role in providing the ground segment for ISRO's low-earth orbit and interplanetary space missions, Indian regional navigation mission as well as for the launch vehicle missions. In addition to this, it performs design and development of weather radars and offers search and rescue facilities.

ISTRAC has established Spacecraft Control Centres, TTC Ground Station Networks across the globe, Deep Space Network, Ground Segment for Navigation mission, including one-way ranging stations, two-way CDMA ranging stations and a precise timing facility, Space Science Data Centre among other things. In addition, ISTRAC performs host of other activities including design and development of weather Radars in multiple frequencies, Search and Rescue Operations and hub services for Satellite Communication Networks. ISTRAC also provides TTC support for missions of other space agencies. ISTRAC brochure isHere.

These services are made available throughNSIL



MCF

Master Control Facility (MCF) at Hassan in Karnataka and Bhopal in Madhya Pradesh monitors and controls all the Geostationary / Geosynchronous satellites of ISRO, namely, INSAT, GSAT, Kalpana and IRNSS series of satellites. MCF is responsible for Orbit Raising of satellites, In-orbit payload testing, and On-orbit operations all through the life of these satellites. MCF activities include round-the-clock Tracking, Telemetry & Commanding (TT&C) operations, and special operations like Eclipse management, Station-keeping manoeuvres and recovery actions in case of contingencies. NRSC, NE-SAC offer ground system supports as outlinedHere.

SAC

The legendry Ahmedabad earth station (Experimental Satellite Communication Earth Station ESCES) was built in 1966, by late Dr.Vikram A Sarabhai. Presently SAC operates & maintains two earth stations, one at Ahmedabad (AES) and another at Delhi (DES). These earth stations have a SAC-ISRO SATCOM infrastructure resource that provides hub / gateway support to the users. SAC is developing various communication & Navigation applicationslike MSS services, FSS services, DTH, Disaster management, Railways real time information system (RTIS),Q/V/Ka band experiments etc.Towards this, SAC is designing and developing various types of user terminals and ground systems.India being an important user of satellitebroadband applications, ISRO has launched HTS satellites GSAT-19, GSAT-11 and GSAT 29 and SAC has established HTS gateways which is providing broadband connectivity to the users.

GSAT-29 Ka x Ka and Ku x Ku gateway facility will cater to high data rate requirements of users in North-East (NE) region and Jammu & Kashmir (J&K)



GSAT-11 Ground Segment: Gateway facilities for GSAT-11 are currently operational at all four main sites i.e. Ahmedabad, Delhi, Bangalore & Ranchi. Long Term Sustainability (LTS)

Space is not confined to national boundaries. Like other space agencies in the world, the Department of space is having international, presence cooperation, coordination.

International cooperation is a strategic area for a space programme because relationships with other countries are influenced by political, economic, cultural, and human personality factors as well as scientific and technological factors. India has always recognized that space has dimension beyond national considerations, which can only be addressed along with international partners. Over the years, as ISRO has matured in experience and technological capabilities, the scope for cooperation has become multifaceted. While exploratory missions beyond the earth are the natural candidates for such cooperative efforts, there are many other themes like climate change impacts on earth, space science and planetary exploration that are of interest to international cooperation because of their global impact.

International cooperation has been part of Indian space programme since inception. Establishment of Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (TERLS), conduct of Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE) and Satellite Telecommunication Experiment Project (STEP), launches of Aryabhata, Bhaskara, Ariane Passenger Payload Experiment (APPLE), IRS-IA, IRS-IB satellites, INSAT series of satellites, Mission to Moon, etc., have the components of international cooperation. ISRO is pursuing bilateral and multilateral relations with space agencies and space related bodies with the aim of building and strengthening existing ties between countries; taking up new scientific and technological challenges; refining space policies and defining international frameworks for exploitation and utilization of outer space for peaceful purposes. Internationally India is viewed by space faring nations as an emerging space power, capable of achieving its goals in a more cost effective and time-efficient manner.

Specifically, the developing countries look to India for assistance in building up their capabilities to derive benefits of space technology. The scope of international cooperation has become wider and diverse, as ISRO has made tremendous progress in recent time. Formal cooperative arrangements in the form of either Agreements or Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) or Framework Agreements have been signed with Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Nigeria, Norway, Peru, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Russia, Sao-Tome & Principe, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sultanate of Oman, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Syria, Tajikistan, Thailand, The Netherlands, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of America, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Vietnam. Also formal cooperative instruments have been signed with international multilateral bodies like European Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), European Commission, European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT), European Space Agency (ESA) and South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).

Highlights of a few achievements through international cooperation

Chandrayaan-1

ISRO’s maiden mission to Moon, the Chandrayaan-1, has been an exemplary example of international cooperation with its international payloads. It has also earned several national and international laurels and was instrumental in the ISRO-NASA joint discovery of water molecules on the moon surface, unattained by any of the previous missions of such nature. Megha-Tropiques

The Indo-French joint satellite mission called MEGHA-TROPIQUES was launched in 2011 for the study of the tropical atmosphere and climate related to aspects such as monsoons, cyclones, etc. The data products from this satellite are made available to the international Scientific community.

Saral

Another joint mission with France, named SARAL (Satellite for ALTIKA and ARGOS) for studying ocean from space using altimetry was successfully launched on February 25, 2013. CNES provided a radar altimeter instrument called ALTIKA and an onboard relay instrument for the international ARGOS data collection system, while, ISRO provided the satellite platform, launch and operations for this joint mission. The  data from the altimeter is currently made available to global scientific community. Ongoing and future activities

ISRO and NASA are realizing a joint satellite mission called NISAR (NASA ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar) for earth science studies.

As part of the Indo-French cooperation, ISRO and CNES have completed the feasibility study on realizing an earth observation satellite mission with thermal infrared imager, named as TRISHNA. ISRO and JAXA scientists are conducting the feasibility study to realize a joint satellite mission to explore the moon’s polar region. As part of ISRO’s prestigious Gaganyaan programme, the cooperation opportunities with countries and space agencies having expertise in human space flight are being explored. The cooperation activities are focused in astronaut training, life support systems, radiation shielding solutions etc.

Unnati

ISRO has announced an 8-week capacity building programme on nano satellite development, named as UNNATI (UNispace Nanosatellite Assembly & Training by ISRO) as an initiative of UNISPACE+50 (the 50th Anniversary of the first United Nations conference on the exploration and peaceful uses of outer space) . The programme will be conducted at UR Rao Satellite Centre (URSC) of ISRO at Bengaluru for three years. In the first batch, 30 participants from 17 countries were successfully trained during Jan 15 - Mar 15, 2019. The second batch was conducted during Oct 15 - Dec 15, 2019 and had 30 participants from 16 countries.

Participation in international bodies in the field of Space

India continues to play active role in deliberation on Scientific and Technical and Legal sub-committees of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UN-COPUOS). India also plays major role in other multilateral fora including United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN-ESCAP), International COSPAS-SARSAT system for search and rescue operations, International Astronautical Federation (IAF), International Academy of Astronautics (IAA), International Institute of Space Law (IISL), Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS), Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), Inter Agency Debris Coordination Committee (IADC), Space Frequency Coordination Group (SFCG), Coordinating Group on Meteorological Satellites (CGMS),International Space Exploration Coordination Group (ISECG), International Space University (ISU), Asian Association for Remote Sensing (AARS), International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS), etc. Internationally, ISRO plays active role in sharing its expertise and satellite data for the management of natural disasters through various multi-agency bodies like International Charter for Space and Major Disasters, Sentinel Asia and UNSPIDER. The Centre for Space Science and Technology Education for Asia and the Pacific (CSSTE-AP) has been set up in India under the initiative of UN Office for Outer Space Affairs (UN OOSA) and offers nine month post graduate diploma courses in Remote Sensing and Geographic Information Systems (every year), Satellite Communication (every alternate year), Satellite Meteorology and Global Climate (every alternate year) and Space and Atmospheric Science (every alternate year).

After completion of the course, students have opportunity to carry out research in their own country for one year leading finally to the award of a Master’s Degree from Andhra University. The Indian Institute of remote sensing IIRS Runs few courses that are affiliated Internationally.

https://www.iirs.gov.in/internationalcollaborations

In response to the UN General Assembly Resolution (45/72 of 11th December, 1990) endorsing the recommendations of UNISPACE-82, the United Nations Office of Outer Space Affairs (UN-OOSA) prepared a project document (A/AC.105/534) envisaging the establishment of Centres for Space Science and Technology Education in the developing countries. In 1994, a UN team conducted an evaluation mission of six countries in Asia-Pacific region. Based on the report of the evaluation mission, UN-OOSA notified India as the host country for establishment of Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific (CSSTEAP).

https://www.cssteap.org/

Capacity BuildingHome/Activities/ Capacity Building

Vision

Systematically carry forward capacity enhancement plans of organization, related to infrastructure, human resources and interfaces with academia & industry to ensure implementation of short term and long term programmatic goals in seamless manner through progressive policies and procedures.

Mission

Responsible for new initiatives in formulating policies, procedures & guidelines in the following areas and carry out objective analysis to ensure the implementation of the same by facilitating ISRO Centres. Academia

Industry Interface

Outreach

Human Resource

Intellectual Property

Technical Infrastructure

Updates

Contact Us

TrainingHome/
                Activities / Training

The ISRO centres offer training to industries, professionals, government officials,
                  teachers, students and general public in the space applications, satellite building etc. Some of the training programs are also available for international students. IIRS is a premier institute primarily focussing on training in GeoSpatial applications.

The training and capacity building programmes of the Institute are designed to meet
                              the requirements of various target/user groups, i.e., for professionals at working,
                              middle and supervisory levels, fresh graduates, researchers, academia and decision
                              makers. The duration of courses ranges from one-week to two-years. The
                              programmes are meticulously designed by the domain experts, and are then
                              approved by the Board of Studies (BoS) and Academic Council (AC) consisting of
                              eminent subject experts. A team of sixty-four dedicated scientists at IIRS contribute
                              in delivering the course contents.

Guest faculties from reputed
                              organizations/institutes in the country and abroad are regularly invited to share their
                              knowledge and experience with the course participants. The training and education programmes conducted by the Institute include
                              educational programmes, Training programmes and e-learning programmes. VisitIIRSfor more details. In response to the UN General Assembly Resolution (45/72 of 11th December, 1990) endorsing
                              the recommendations of UNISPACE-82, the United Nations Office of Outer Space Affairs (UN-
                              OOSA) prepared a project document (A/AC.105/534) envisaging the establishment of Centers
                              for Space Science and Technology Education in the developing countries.

In 1994, a UN team
                              conducted an evaluation mission of six countries in Asia-Pacific region. Based on the
                              report of
                              the evaluation mission, UN-OOSA notified India as the host country for establishment of
                              Centre
                              for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific (CSSTEAP). The Centre
                              was established in India on November 1, 1995 under an agreement signed initially by 10
                              member countries of the region. The Centre is hosted by the Government of India with
                              Department of Space (DOS), as the nodal agency.

DOS has made available appropriate
                              facility
                              and expertise to the Centre through the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), at
                              Dehradun,
                              Space Applications Centre (SAC), at Ahmedabad and Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), at
                              Ahmedabad. Human resource development in the Asia-Pacific region in applying space science and
                              technology for sustainable development of the region, achieved through academic excellence
                              thereby enabling all learners to reach their individual potential. The Research and training programs' are designed for the target
                              audience of Graduates and Post graduate students, the Researchers from R & D institutes
                              and Academia. The broad area will be applications of remote sensing.

The data base
                              contained in VEDAS will be used as a source. A set of standard curricula developed by the United Nations is
                              adapted for the educational
                              programmes. The Centre is affiliated to the United Nations and its educational programmes
                              are
                              recognized by Andhra University, India. VisitCSSTEAPfor
                              more details

Physical Research Laboratory (PRL)is a National
                              Research Institute for space and allied
                              sciences, supported mainly by Department of Space, Government of India.

This research
                              laboratory has ongoing research programmes in astronomy and astrophysics, atmospheric
                              sciences and aeronomy, Earth sciences, Solar System studies and theoretical physics. The
                              initial
                              focus was research on cosmic rays and the properties of the upper atmosphere. Research
                              areas
                              were expanded to include theoretical physics and radio physics later with grants from the
                              Atomic
                              Energy Commission. Today PRL is involved in research, related to five major fields of
                              science.

PRL is also
                              instrumental in the PLANEX planetary science and exploration programme. PRL also offers various fellowships, internships and project training
                              courses. VisitPRLfor more details

Remote Sensing, GIS and web information services has emerged as a
                              significant
                              tool for implementation of efficient spatial information technologies needed for
                              tailoring methodologies useful for retrieving, analysis of spatial and non-spatial
                              attributes data. For implementation of good governance at State and national level
                              offices, Geospatial technologies are playing a vital role in leveraging spatial data
                              towards effective asset & resource management.

Also enabling user community for
                              enhanced utilization of Geospatial Technologies towards sustainable development
                              management and practices. NRSC organizes capacity building courses in Geospatial Technologies
                              and
                              Applications towards effective utilization of satellite data products for operational,
                              scientific research and societal benefits for users/professionals working at field level,
                              managerial, executives and decision makers. Professionals from various Government / Private / Autonomous / NGOs /
                              Faculty and
                              Researchers from Academic Institutions working in the domain of geospatial
                              technologies and its applications are eligible for these courses

Courses : Regular, special / theme-oriented and customized courses
                              are organized
                              towards capacity building of user community for effective use of space inputs for
                              various applications in about 20 programmes and training around 500 officials /
                              academic scholars per year. VisitNRSC Courses Overviewfor
                              more details

SMART (Satellite Meteorology and OceAnography Research and Training) is ISRO’s
                              initiative to support students, academics and researchers across the country to
                              pursue research in the field of Meteorology and Oceanography using satellite data
                              archived at MOSDAC and other related datasets.

TREES (Training and Research in Earth Eco-System) is ISRO's
                              initiative to support
                              Graduate and Post graduate students, professionals from academics and
                              researchers across the country to pursue research in the field of Earth Eco systems
                              research using earth observation satellite systems. The Research and training programs' are designed for the target
                              audience of
                              Graduates and Post graduate students, the Researchers from R & D institutes and
                              Academia. The broad area will be applications of remote sensing. The data base
                              contained in VEDAS will be used as a source.

VisitSACfor more details. Student Satellite Programme. ISRO encourages students at potential academic institutions where
                              basic facilities /
                              labs exist to build small satellites. The intention is to create basic awareness in the
                              satellite building, on their own utilising the available resources within the academic
                              institution.

ISRO gives basic training and share some of the resources for realising
                              the small satellites. VisitStudent
                                satellite pagefor more details. UNNATI, (UNispace Nanosatellite Assembly & Training by ISRO), a training for
                              Assembly, Integration and Testing of NanoSatellites. The opportunity for registration
                              will be publicised.

VisitUNNATIfor more details. Under the capacity building exercise ISRO launched a digital STEM
                              portal Jigyasa,
                              which offers e-learning courses on space science, technology and applications. The
                              course participation certificates can be printed on-line, after successful completion
                              and evaluation of the course. The portal also hosts several education videos and
                              content for basic education of students / public.

VisitJigyasa

OutreachHome/ Activities/Outreach

The Department of space has been engaging students, academicians, enthusiasts
                                        and all other stakeholders in its programmes. On regular basis the outreach
                                        programmes are conducted on the creations of national science Day and world
                                        space week.Major centres have got space exhibitions that visitors can visit on working
                                        days.Capacity Building Programme Office considers outreach as one of the major
                                        activities. The details of arehereIIRS conducts E-learning programmes on various topics and themes. Here are thedetailsAdditionally, following are the specific Outreach activities.

PRL Open House Exhibition

To share and spread the awareness about science and research in society an
                                            open house exhibition is being organised at PRL, Ahmedabad from time to
                                            time. Know morehere

Vikram Sarabhai Competition for Concept-Essay Writing (VOICE)

This essay competition is organised by PRL, Ahmedabad. Standard 8-10 students of the country can participate inthis

Science Express

A team from PRL organises science exhibition/demonstrations at different
                                            places of Gujarat and Rajasthan in coordination with schools/community
                                            science centersto reach out to the
                                            school and college students with an emphasis on the underprivileged students
                                            and also the girl students of rural background and the general public to
                                            share the excitement of science. Thedetails

Outreach at NRSC

NRSC conducts various outreach activities including World Space Week
                                            celebration, Exhibition, Awareness Days.

The details are
                                            here. This page archives popular audio talks during World Space Week
                                            celebrations 2020.here

World Space Week at VSSC:

World Space Week consists of space education and outreach events held by
                                            space agencies, aerospace companies, schools, planetaria, museums, and
                                            astronomy clubs around the world in a common timeframe. World Space Week is coordinated by the United Nations with the support of
                                            theWorld Space Week
                                                        Association (WSWA)The WSWA leads a global team of National Coordinators, who promote the
                                            celebration of World Space Week within their own countries. The details of
                                            celebrations at VSSC arehere.

World Space Week Celebrations:

SDSC SHAR, Sriharikota the "Spaceport of India" and one of the lead
                                                centres under ISRO has been traditionally celebrating the World Space
                                                Week with a gamut of public outreach programmes at Sriharikota since
                                                2000. The outreach programme has taken new wings in 2015 by spreading its
                                                activities to nearby places like Tirupathi, Vijayawada and Guntur. By
                                                2016, it spanned to 15 selected locations in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana
                                                and Tamilnadu
                                                and has witnessed overwhelming response from school and college
                                                students.For visiting Space Theme Park, one can contacthereorhereThe launch can be witnessed from viewer’s gallery at SHAR. One can registerhere

National Science Day at URSC

To celebrate this discovery of "Raman Effect" and to create scientific
                                            awareness among the school children, National Science Day (NSD) is
                                            celebrated every year on February 28, at URSC.

Various events are organised
                                            during the NSD for the school
                                            students which are aimed to infuse the spirit of scientific reasoning in the
                                            young minds. The announcement is made, normally, during February every year. The details arehere

NSSS-2022: Space Science Outreach

National Space Science Symposium-2022 (NSSS-2022): Space Science Outreach
                                            Component is Inaugurated.Click here to read more. ISRO Participation at IISF

Chairman, ISRO/ Secretary, DOS interacted with students at the India
                                            International Science Festival (IISF) at Bhopal.Click here
                                                to read more.

Open Gallery At SHAR

The live launch of PSLV -C54/EOS-06 Mission was witnessed by 10342 people
                                            from theOpen View Galleryat SDSC
                                            SHAR, Sriharikota. CBPO plays an instrumental role in smooth
                                                    participation of ISRO in international events, such as COSPAR, IAC,
                                                    etc.

1. International Astronautical Congress (IAC-2021)



International Astronautical Congress (IAC-2021) was organized at
                                                        Dubai during October 25th – 29th, 2021. ISRO participated and
                                                        established a pavilion by showcasing achievements and future
                                                        programmes of ISRO.

It facilitated, technical presentations,
                                                        bilateral meetings with other national space agencies and
                                                        business connects with international space industry to explore
                                                        future opportunities on collaborations. Secretary, DOS /
                                                        Chairman, ISRO and senior officials of DOS participated in the
                                                        event.

2. World Expo - 2020, Dubai



DOS particpated in the Dubai World Expo-2020 at Dubai. ISRO
                                                        curated the concepts and finalised the gallery displays for
                                                        Space Pavilion in collaboration with Dept. of Commerce, which
                                                        are exhibited for six months from 01st October, 2021 to 31st
                                                        March, 2022.

Space week was organised at Indian Pavilion , World
                                                        expo from 17th – 23rd October, 2021. ISRO developed digital
                                                        content on various on present & furutre missions and
                                                        achievements of ISRO and screened through out the week and
                                                        interacted with visitors and students visiting the gallery. ISRO
                                                        organised technical sessions along with FICCI involving mutiple
                                                        space agencies and industry. Various Directors of ISRO centers
                                                        delivered keynote addresses and participated in panel discussion
                                                        in five sessions.

ISRO team also interacted with various foreign
                                                        space agecies on call and discussed potetital collaborations
                                                        with industry and academia. Recognizing students’ outreach as one of the
                                                    important activities, CBPO proposes programs to stoke curiosity of
                                                    the younger ones in space science, technology and applications.1. Indian International Science Festival (IISF
                                                    -2021)ISRO participated in the Indian International Science Festival (IISF
                                                -2021) organised by Ministry of Science & Technology and Ministry of
                                                Earth Science in association with Vijnana Bharati and State Govt. of Goa
                                                during December, 10th - 13th, 2021. ISRO extended
                                                technical support for oragnising assembly & launch of model rocket by
                                                school students.

Around 550 students gathered, assembled model rockets
                                                and launched 498 no. of model rockets successfully and made gunniess
                                                book of records. ISRO also estabilished exhibition stall,
                                                showcasing ISRO’s achievements and future programmes. The space on
                                                wheels is the centre of attraction for the students and public
                                                dessiminated various missions of ISRO. ISRO bagged the best participator
                                                award.



2.

ATL Space Challenge 2021

Atal Innovation Mission (AIM), NITI Aayog in collaboration with the
                                                    Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and Central Board of
                                                    Secondary Education (CBSE) launched the ATL Space Challenge 2021 for
                                                    all school students across the country. The ATL Space Challenge 2021 aligns with the World Space Week 2021
                                                    which is being observed from 4th to 10th October each year at the
                                                    global level.The challenge has been designed for all the school students, mentors
                                                    and teachers across the country. This is to ensure that students of
                                                    classes 6 to 12 are given an open platform where they can innovate
                                                    and enable themselves to solve digital
                                                    age space technology problems. Around 600 students have submitted
                                                    their projects and 75 best projects have been selected for award.

Under the DOS, the Indian Institute of space technology IIST, the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS)  and few other centres offer academic courses for Indian students. Courses cover graduate, postgraduate and doctoral degrees. Details of academic courses conducted at various centres are provided below. Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS) at Dehradun

Visit IIRS for details.

Academic Collaboration

DA-IICT, Gandhinagar (https:// www.daiict.ac.in/), Anand Agriculture University (AAU), Anand (http://www.aau.in/anand-agricultural-university-anand), and Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), ISRO, Dehradun (https:// www.iirs.gov.in/) are jointly offering a two-year “M.Sc. program in Agriculture Analytics.” DA-IICT, AAU and IIRS are the premier universities/ Institutes in ICT, Agriculture, and Space Technology domain, respectively. This is a multidisciplinary program of agriculture and data analytics. The program is aimed at nurturing students, with insights and the know-how to take the sector into the future. The course will introduce students to concepts of data analytics, viz. descriptive, predictive and prescriptive, in agriculture and will empower the students to eliminate speculative farming and usher in the age of predictive agriculture.

For registration visit:https://www.daiict.ac.in/admissions#tab-2

Courses for International students

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS) is a premier institute with the primary aim to build capacity in Remote Sensing and Geo-informatics and their applications through education and training programmes at Post Graduate level. The Institute also hosts and provides support to the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and The Pacific (CSSTE-AP), affiliated to the United Nations, to conduct Remote Sensing & GIS training and education programmes at Post Graduate level. The training and education programmes of the Institute are designed to meet the requirements of various target/user groups, i.e., for professionals at working, middle and supervisory levels, fresh graduates, researchers, academia and decision makers. The duration of courses ranges from one-week to two-years.

Visithttps://www.iirs.gov.in/cssteapandhttps://www.cssteap.org/for details. Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST), Thiruvananthapuram

IIST, Asia’s first Space University, was established at Thiruvananthapuram in 2007 with the objective of offering high quality education in space science and technology to meet the demands of Indian Space Programme. The institute offers undergraduate, postgraduate, doctoral and post-doctoral programmes in broad areas of space science, technology and applications. Visithttps://iist.ac.in/academics/curriculafor more details

Indian Space Research Programme (ISRO) encourages / supports, national/ international conferences focussed on the space activities or connected to the ISRO’s missions/ programmes/ objectives, which are conducted by recognised universities/ Institutions/ Agencies /Industry on the themes of mutual interest.

ISRO shall consider financial assistance subject to following conditions:

Rules for Conference Grant:

Forms

Following pages guide the visitor to various fellowship (JRF, SRF, PDF or research associate) offered by various Centres, units or autonomous bodies in DOS. Physical Research Laboratory (PRL) invites applications forJunior Research Fellowships(JRFs) from highly motivated and dynamic candidates to pursue research in the science domains of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics, Geosciences and Theoretical Physics. JRFs at PRL will be encouraged to register for a Ph.D. degree at an Institute/University with which PRL has an MoU. PRL also offersPost-Doctoral Fellowship(PDF) in research areas of the Laboratory is offered for a maximum period of two years.

The extension to 2nd year is subject to the satisfactory annual progress review. Candidates who have submitted their Ph.D. thesis or those who are about to submit their Ph.D. thesis can apply. Space Physics Laboratory (SPL) has a broad spectrum of opportunities for doing front ranking research in the areas of Atmospheric, Space and Planetary Sciences. These opportunities are offered as followingfellowships.For the latest advertisement for JRF position,click here.The Research Associate Positions are always OPEN at SPL and the candidates can apply any time of the year.

In addition to the above, SPL hosts INSPIRE faculty and NPDF candidates to carry out their research activities. SPL has a visiting scientist (VS) program, which either operates through ADCOS VS program, or directly by SPL. Any enquiry for these positions can be directed to the Director SPL. Indian Institute of Space Technology (IIST) invites applications from highly motivated candidates forPost Doctoral FellowshipProgramme in various frontier research areas of Aerospace Engineering, Avionics, Chemistry and Physics.

National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL) offers Post Doctoral Fellow (PDF)/Research Associate (RA). Follow this link for details:NARLWork with NARL >> Vacancies

URSC offers fellowships that will be announced here. Space Applications Centre (SAC) invites applications for Research Fellowships, Research Associateships and Research Scientists 

                             for specific projects or Education/Research Schemes. The recipients of these Fellowships/ Associateships /Scientists are expected to conduct 

                             research work whole time under the Principal Investigator of the SAC/ISRO sponsored project.

In special cases of individual Research Fellows/Associates, 

                             the candidates could be governed by the conditions of Research work as specified by the projects/ programmes/ schemes for which the Fellowships have been offered by ISRO. The detailed information about various fellowship/Associateships are provided at SAC Vyom website clickhere.In addition to the above, SAC also hosts INSPIRE/CSIR JRF, DST Women Scientist, UGC NET JRF candidates from various universities/institutes to carry out their research activities at SAC. SAC also collaborate with various universities/institutes for doing research under different umbrella like SAMUDRA, NISAR, AVIRIS, SRISTHI, NavIC with respect to specific projects. Under this fund is also provided by SAC to carry out research work and recruiting JRF/SRF.

For the latest advertisement for Research Fellowships, Research Associateships and Research Scientists position,clickhere

About ISROHome/About/Profile

Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) is the space agency of India. The organisation is involved in science, engineering and technology to harvest the benefits of outer space for India and the mankind. ISRO is a major constituent of the Department of Space (DOS), Government of India. The department executes the Indian Space Programme primarily through various Centres or units within ISRO.

ISRO was previously the Indian National Committee for Space Research (INCOSPAR), set up by the Government of India in 1962, as envisioned by Dr. VikramA Sarabhai. ISRO was formed on August 15, 1969 and superseded INCOSPAR with an expanded role to harness space technology. DOS was set up and ISRO was brought under DOS in 1972.

The prime objective of ISRO/DOS is the development and application of space technology for various national needs. To fulfil this objective, ISRO has established major space systemsfor communication, television broadcasting and meteorological services; resources monitoring and management; space-based navigation services. ISRO has developed satellite launch vehicles, PSLV and GSLV, to place the satellites in the required orbits. Alongside its technological advancement, ISRO contributes to science and science education in the country.

Various dedicated research centres and autonomous institutions for remote sensing, astronomy and astrophysics, atmospheric sciences and space sciences in general function under the aegis of Department of Space. ISRO's own Lunar and interplanetary missions along with other scientific projects encourage and promote science education, apart from providing valuable data to the scientific community which in turn enriches science. ISRO has its headquarters in Bengaluru. Its activities are spread across various centres and units.

Launch Vehicles are built at VikramSarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), Thiruvananthapuram; Satellites are designed and developed at U R Rao Satellite Centre (URSC), Bengalure; Integration and launching of satellites and launch vehicles are carried out from Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC), Sriharikota; Development of liquid stages including cryogenic stage is carried out at Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC), Valiamala& Bengaluru; Sensors for Communication and Remote Sensing satellites and application aspects of the space technology are taken up at Space Applications Centre (SAC), Ahmedabad and Remote Sensing satellite data reception processing and dissemination is entrusted to National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC), Hyderabad. The activities of ISRO are guided by its Chairman, who would also be the secretary of DOS and Chairman of Space commission – the apex body that formulates the policies and overseas the implementation of the Indian Space Programme. Vision, Mission and Objectives of the Department of Space.Home/ About / Vision-Mission-Objectives

Vision

Harness, sustain and augment space technology for national development, while pursuing space science
                  research and planetary exploration. Mission

Design and development of launch vehicles and related technologies for providing access to space.

Design and development of satellites and related technologies for earth observation,
                      communication, navigation, meteorology and space science. Communication programme for meeting telecommunication, television broadcasting and developmental
                      applications. Satellite-based Remote Sensing programme for management of natural resources and monitoring of
                      environment using space based imagery. Space based navigation system

Space based Applications for Societal development.

Research and Development in space science and planetary exploration. Promote and authorise private firms to play key role in global Space market

Objectives

•  Operational flights of Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV),
                  Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV)
                  and Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV)

•  Design and development of New Space Transportation solutions

•   Design, Development and Realization of Communication Satellites

•  Design, Development and Realization of Earth Observation Satellites.

•   Development of Navigation Satellite Systems

•   Development of satellites for Space Science and Planetary Exploration

•   Earth Observation Applications

•   Space based systems for Societal Applications

•   Advanced Technologies and newer initiatives

•   Training, Capacity building and Education

•   Promotion of Space technology

•   Infrastructure / Facility Development for space research

•   International Cooperation

•   Commercial utilisiation of the products and services emanating from the Indian space
                  programme

•   Promotion & Authorisation of Indian private firms in Space sector

Citizen's CharterHome/ About / Citizen's Charter

Our Clients

User Ministries/Departments of the Central Government

Remote Sensing Agencies in State Governments and Union Territories. Quasi Government Organisations, NGOs and the Private Sector for developmental purposes through
                        satellite imaging. Educational institutions in promotion of research and development in space science and
                        technology.

International government and private firms seeking the services such as launch service, satellite realisation service, launch support service, etc. Our Activities

The Department of Space has evolved the following programmes with the objective of promoting &
                    developing application of space science and space technology:

Launch Vehicle programme having indigenous capability for launching the satellites. Programme for telecommunications, broadcasting, meteorology, development of education etc. Remote Sensing Programme for application of satellite imagery for various developmental purposes.

NavIC system for satellite based navigation

Research and Development in Space Sciences and Technology for serving the end of applying them for national development. International co-operation for mutual benefit and disaster management

Capacity building for developing and harnessing the Space technologies

Promotion and authorisation of private players in Space sector

Providing know-how and training at national and international levels

Services Provided by The Department of Space

Provide national space infrastructure for the telecommunication needs of the country. Provide satellite services required for weather forecasting, monitoring etc. Provide satellite imagery required for the developmental and security needs of the country.

Provide satellite imagery and specific products and services required for application of space science and technology for developmental purposes to the Central Government, State Governments, Quasi Governmental Organisations, NGOs and the private sector. Provide space based navigation system

Provide launch services, satellite or sub-systems, launch support, mission support, ground system support and disaster management

Transfer of technologies for technological, industrial and societal applications

Promote Research & Development in space sciences and technology. The Department of Space is committed to

While making the above mentioned objectives operational, Department of Space will

Establish and maintain national space infrastructure for telecommunication, broadcasting and navigation needs of the country

Provide satellite service including imagery for weather forecasting, disaster management, natural resources survey and monitoring of the environment

Provide its products and services in a prompt, efficient and transparent manner to all the users/clients

Promote and authorise private firms to play their role in Space sector, globally

ISRO Centres & Units

IN-SPACe

CPSEs

Autonomous bodies

Former Secretaries / ChairmanHome/ About /Former Secretaries/ Chairman



Read More



Read More



Read More



Read More



Read More



Read More



Read More



Read More



Read More



Read More

Dr. S.

SOMANATH (2022 - 2025)Home/About/Former chairman/Dr. S. SOMANATH

Dr. Sreedhara Panicker Somanathserved as a Distinguished Scientist (Apex Grade) and Secretary, Department of Space (DoS), Chairman, Space Commission and Chairman, Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO) from January 2022 to January 2025.

Dr. S. Somanath, is currently the Vikram Sarabhai Distinguished Professor at ISRO. Dr.

S. Somanath, having a career spanning nearly 40 years, is an expert in the field of space technology and systems engineering of launch vehicles, and has made significant contributions in many areas. As Secretary of DoS, he had piloted the National Space Policy, engagement of ISRO with private space initiatives and start-ups in space sector and enabled aggregation of user demands, take up commercial activities including Launch vehicle production and spacecraft operations by NSIL. Overcoming many challenges and accomplishing mission Chandrayaan-3 landing near the south pole of the Moon was under his leadership.

Notable accomplishments include Aditya-L1, XpoSat, INSAT-3DS, NVS-01, Oceansat, GSAT-24, SpaDeX and commercial PSLV & LVM3-OneWeb missions. Under his leadership Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV) and Test Vehicle (TV) were developed and landing experiments of the Re-usable Launch Vehicle (RLV-LEX) was accomplished. He played a crucial role in the architecture of Gaganyaan and accomplished the first Test Vehicle flight for mission abort demonstration. He was instrumental in developing the ‘Space Vision-2047’, where Gaganyaan expansion program, Chandrayaan series and other exploration missions, Bharatiya Antariksha Station development and human mission to Moon, new launch pads were developed and got approved.

As Director of Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) during 2018-21, he was responsible for Launch vehicle technology development. LVM3-M1/Chandrayaan-2 mission, development of critical systems for the Gaganyaan programme, Small Satellite Launch Vehicle, Re-usable Launch Vehicle-LEX & ORV, Air-Breathing technology programs were under his leadership. He was the Director of  Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC) during 2015-18 where, the development and qualification of C25 cryogenic engine and stage was completed and successfully flown in LVM3-D1 flight and accomplished first time launch of electric propulsion system in GSAT. He was the lead system engineer of the LVM3 rocket and was the Project Director for the Experimental flight of LVM3-X/CARE mission which was successfully accomplished in December, 2014.

He was the Associate Director of VSSC and Deputy Director of Propulsion Entity (PRSO) of VSSC. He worked as the Project manager and integration engineer in PSLV project in his early phase of the career. Dr. S.

Somanath took his B. Tech in Mechanical Engineering from TKM College of Engineering, Kollam with a university rank, Masters in Aerospace Engineering from Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore with gold medal and PhD from IITM Chennai. He has been bestowed with many Honorary Doctorates from universities including, Centurion, Karunya, Satyabhama, SRM, Uttarakhand TU, Sarada Birla, Bangalore, JNTU, KUHS, Amity, VTU & DY Patil Vidyapeeth. He is a Fellow of Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE), Fellow of Indian National Academy of Science (INSA), Fellow of Aeronautical Society of India (AeSI), Astronautical Society of India (ASI) and a member of International Academy of Astronautics (IAA).

He is the President (Elect) of AeSI and President of Society of Aerospace Quality and Reliability (SAQR). He is the recipient of ‘Hall of Fame’ award from International Astronautics Federation (IAF), National Aeronautics Prize from AeSI, Space gold medal from ASI, Platinum Jubilee award and Distinguished alumni award of IISc, Bangalore and IIT Madras, distinguished fellow award from IIT Kanpur and Karnataka Rajyotsava award. He has published papers in journals and conferences in the area of structural dynamics and control, materials modelling, dynamic analysis of separation mechanisms, vibration and acoustic testing, launch vehicle design and launch services management. Dr.

S. Somanath has widely travelled and visited across most global space agencies and facilities, has been a delegate to UN-COPUOS, vice President of International Astronautical Federation (IAF) and participated in International Astronautical Congress (IAC) held at different countries. Dr K Sivan (2018 - 2022)Home/About/Former chairman/Dr K Sivan

Dr. K.

Sivanserved as the Secretary, Department of Space, Chairman, Space Commission and Chairman, Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) from January 2018 to January 2022. Dr. K Sivan joined ISRO in 1982 and was inducted into PSLV Project. He is specialised in Aerospace engineering, Space Transportation Systems Engineering, Launch vehicle and mission design, control & guidance design and mission simulation software design, Mission synthesis, simulation, analysis and validation of flight systems.

He has significantly contributed towards end-to-end mission planning, design, integration and analysis. His innovative contributions, particularly the strategies adopted in mission design enabled the consistent performance of PSLV. This has  also proved to be a good foundation for other launch vehicles of ISRO, like, GSLV MkII & MkIII including RLV-TD. He is the chief architect of 6D trajectory simulation software, SITARA, which is the backbone of the real-time and non-real-time trajectory simulations of all ISRO launch vehicles.

He was responsible for commissioning world-class simulation facility in ISRO for mission synthesis and analysis, which is used for mission design, sub-system level validation and integrated validation of avionics systems in all ISRO launch vehicles. He developed and implemented an innovative 'day-of launch wind biasing strategy' that enables rocket launch on any day, under varied weather and wind conditions. He was the chief mission architect for successful launch of 104 satellites in a single mission of PSLV. He has received many awards including Doctor of Science (Honoris Causa) from selected universities

He has numerous publications in various reputed Journals including a book in Nov 2015 “Integrated Design for Space Transportation System” published by Springer.

“Shri Hari Om Ashram Prerit Dr.Vikram Sarabhai Research Award”, 1999

ISRO Merit Award, 2007

“Dr Biren Roy Space Science and/or Design Award”, 2011

Distinguished Alumnus Award from MIT Alumni Association, 2013

ISRO award for outstanding achievement in 2016

Distinguished Alumnus Award from  IIT-Bombay, 2017

Doctor of Science (Honoris Causa), Sathyabama University & Dr MGR University, Chennai

Indian National Academy of Engineering (INAE)

FeAeronautical Society of India (AeSI)

Systems Society of India (SSI)

Indian Systems Society for Science and Engineering (ISSE)

Dr.

K. Radhakrishnan (2009-2014)Home/ About/Former chairman/Dr. K. Radhakrishnan

Dr.

Koppillil Radhakrishnan,is a Technocrat par
                                                excellence; a dynamic and result-oriented Manager with very fine
                                                personal and inter-personal qualities; an astute Institution-builder
                                                with a strategic vision; an able and diligent Administrator with a
                                                positive attitude; and an inspiring Leader with a rather rare skill of
                                                nurturing leadership in the younger generation

Dr. Radhakrishnan was born on August 29, 1949 at
                                                Irinjalakuda, Kerala. He graduated in Electrical Engineering from Kerala
                                                University (1970), completed his PGDM from Indian Institute of
                                                Management, Bangalore (1976) and obtained Doctorate for his thesis
                                                titled “Some Strategies for Indian Earth Observation System” from Indian
                                                Institute of Technology, Kharagpur (2000). He is a Fellow of Indian
                                                National Academy of Science (FNASc), Fellow of Indian National Academy
                                                of Engineering (FNAE); Honorary Life Fellow of The Institution of
                                                Engineers, India; Honorary Fellow of The Institution of Electrical and
                                                Telecommunication Engineers, India; and Member of International Academy
                                                of Astronautics

Starting his career as an Avionics Engineer in Vikram
                                                Sarabhai Space Centre, he held several decisive positions in ISRO in the
                                                domains of space launch systems, space applications and space programme
                                                management.

He had commendably held the post of Director, Vikram
                                                Sarabhai Space Centre, the lead centre for launch vehicle technology in
                                                ISRO and Director, National Remote Sensing Agency. In his brief stint
                                                (2000-2005) in the Ministry of Earth Sciences, he had also been the
                                                Founder Director of Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
                                                Services (INCOIS) and the first Project Director of Indian National
                                                Tsunami Warning System. He also held several important positions at the
                                                international level including Vice Chairman of Intergovernmental
                                                Oceanographic Commission (2001-05), Founder Chairman of Indian Ocean
                                                Global Ocean Observing System (2001-06) and Chairman of the Working
                                                Group of the Whole UN-COPUOS STSC (2008-2009). Since October 2009, Indian Space Programme have carried
                                                the signatures of the strong leadership of Dr.

Radhakrishnan with
                                                focussed thrust towards (a) space applications for societal services and
                                                national imperatives; (b) creation, management and sustenance capability
                                                and capacity for space systems; (d) undertaking new and path-breaking
                                                missions (e) development of several critical technologies ; and most
                                                importantly (f) ensuring synergy of 16,000 strong ISRO Team with Indian
                                                Industry, Academia, User community and several National R&D
                                                Laboratories. Dr. Radhakrishnan is recipient of
                                                                numerous accolades including the prestigious Allan D
                                                                Emil Memorial Award from International Astronautical
                                                                Federation;“Distinguished Alumnus Award” of IIT
                                                                Kharagpur (2010) and of IIM Bangalore (2010); Vikram
                                                                Sarabhai Memorial Award of Indian Science
                                                                Congress.(2010); Social Sciences Award (2009) of the
                                                                International Academy of Astronautics; Athivishishta
                                                                Rajakeeya Puraskaram – "Sastra Ratna" by the
                                                                Pazhassiraja Charitable Trust (2010); Dr. Y.

Nayudamma
                                                                Memorial Award of Andhra Pradesh Academy of Sciences
                                                                (2009); BHASKARA Award of Indian Society of Remote
                                                                Sensing (2008); Silver Jubilee Honour by Ministry of
                                                                Earth Sciences (2006); VASVIK Industrial Research Award
                                                                in the field of Electrical and Electronics Sciences &
                                                                Technology (2005); and K.R. Ramanathan Memorial Gold
                                                                Medal of Indian Geophysical Union (2003). In 2014 he was
                                                                bestowed with the coveted Padma-Bhushan, the third
                                                                highest civilian honour in the country. Dr.

Radhakrishnan has been conferred
                                                                Honorary Doctorates by as many as ten Indian Uiversities
                                                                (i) Amity University, (ii) IIT Kharagpur, (iii) Shri
                                                                Krishnadevaraya University, Anantpur; (iv) Pandit. Ravishankar Shukla University, Raipur; (v) KIIT
                                                                University, Bhubaneswar; (vi) Sri Venkateswara
                                                                University, Tirupati; (vii) Rajasthan Technical
                                                                University, Kota; (viii) GITAM University,
                                                                Visakhapatnam, (ix) Tumkur University and (x) SRM
                                                                University, Chennai. Dr. Radhakrishnan has contributed to
                                                                academia in several ways.

He had been author/co-author
                                                                for more than 55 publications, including 12 in standard
                                                                referred journals includingSpace Forum, Current Science,
                                                                Journal of Aerospace Sciences and Technologies, Acta
                                                                Astronautica, Journal of Geological Society of India,
                                                                Journal of Rural technology etc. He has also delivered
                                                                several prestigious addresses/award lectures including
                                                                the Air-Marshall Katre Memorial Lecture (2013); 29th
                                                                Convocation Address at Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for
                                                                Medical Sciences and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram
                                                                (2013); 35th Convocation Address at Indian Institute of
                                                                Management, Bangalore (2010); "Statistics Day of India"
                                                                Technical Seminar at Indian Statistical Institute
                                                                Calcutta (2010); 1st Invited Lecture at IISc Alumni
                                                                Association(2010), 9th Convocation Address at
                                                                International Institute of Information Technology,
                                                                Hyderabad (2010), Subroto Mukherjee Memorial Oration of
                                                                Indian Aerospace Society (2008); and ARDB Dr. Satish
                                                                Dhawan Memorial Lecture of Aeronautical Society of India
                                                                (2007). He has had a distinguished career
                                                                adorned with accomplishments spanning beyond 41 years in
                                                                space technology, applications and space programme
                                                                management.

Starting
                                                                    his career as an Avionics Engineer in May 1971 at
                                                                    ISRO’s Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC),
                                                                    Thiruvananthapuram; he commendably held several
                                                                    decisive positions in ISRO later such as Project
                                                                    Director for setting up Regional Remote Sensing
                                                                    Centers (1987-89); Director of Budget & Economic
                                                                    Analysis for entire ISRO (1987-97); Director of
                                                                    National Natural Resources Management
                                                                    System-Regional Remote Sensing Service Centers
                                                                    (1989-97); Mission Director of Integrated Mission
                                                                    for Sustainable Development and Deputy Director of
                                                                    National Remote Sensing Agency (1997-2000); Director
                                                                    of National Remote Sensing Agency (2005-08);
                                                                    Director of Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (2007-09);
                                                                    and Member, Space Commission (October 2008-October
                                                                    2009) with some responsibilities in concurrence. During
                                                                    July 2000-November 2005, he had a stint in the
                                                                    Department of Ocean Development (currently Ministry
                                                                    of Earth Sciences) as the Founder Director of Indian
                                                                    National Centre for Ocean Information Services and
                                                                    the first Project Director of Indian National
                                                                    Tsunami Warning System. He
                                                                    held several important positions at the
                                                                    international level during his tenure at Department
                                                                    of Ocean Development and also in ISRO. The
                                                                    prestigious positions include Vice Chairman of
                                                                    Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission
                                                                    (2001-05), Regional Coordinator (Indian Ocean) for
                                                                    International Project on Argo Profiling Floats
                                                                    (2001-05), Founder Chairman of Indian Ocean Global
                                                                    Ocean Observing System (2001-06), Chairman of the
                                                                    Working Group of the Whole of UN-COPUOS STSC
                                                                    (2008-2009) and Leader of Indian delegation to
                                                                    UN-COPUOS (2008-09).

In
                                                                    November 01, 2009, Dr. Radhakrishnan assumed the
                                                                    concomitant responsibilities of Chairman of Space
                                                                    Commission and Secretary, Department of Space,
                                                                    Government of India as well as the Chairman of ISRO
                                                                    Council (Chairman, ISRO). Also,
                                                                    he has been also holding related ex-officio
                                                                    portfolios as(i) Chairman of INSAT Coordination
                                                                    Committee;(ii) Chairman of Board of Management
                                                                    of Indian Institute of Space Science & Technology
                                                                    (IIST), Thiruvananthapuram;(iii) Chairman of
                                                                    Management Council of Semiconductor Laboratory
                                                                    (SCL),Chandigarh;(iv) Chairman of Governing
                                                                    Council of North-Eastern Space Applications Centre,
                                                                    Shillong;(v) Chairman of Governing Council of
                                                                    National Atmospheric Research Laboratory, Tirupati;(vi) Member of Council of Physical Research
                                                                    Laboratory, Ahmedabad, and(vii) Member of
                                                                    Planning Committee of National Natural Resources
                                                                    Management System (PC-NNRMS). He was Chairman of the
                                                                    Board of ANTRIX Corporation Ltd during Nov 2009-July
                                                                    2011.

He
                                                                    is Member of the CSIR Society and Governing Body
                                                                    (since 2011) and Chairman of Research Council,
                                                                    National Aerospace Laboratory of CSIR (since April
                                                                    2010). He
                                                                    is Ex-officio Member of the Scientific Advisory
                                                                    Committees to PM and to the Cabinet. Also, he is a
                                                                    Member of the Council of NITs, Governing Councils of
                                                                    several IISERs

Fellow
                                                                    of Indian National Academy of Engineering (2009)

Fellow
                                                                    of National Academy of Sciences (2010)

Hon. Life Fellow, Institution of Engineers, India (2010)

Hon.

Fellow, Institution of Electronics & Telecom. Engineers, India (2011)

Member
                                                                    of International Academy of Astronautics (2010)

Fellow
                                                                    of Andhra Pradesh Academy of Sciences (2008)

Fellow
                                                                    of Indian Society of Remote Sensing (2008)

Fellow
                                                                    of Indian Geophysical Union (2003)

Vice
                                                                    President, Indian Geophysical Union (2007-09)

President, Indian Society of Remote Sensing
                                                                    (2005-07)

President,
                                                                    Astronautical Society of India (since 2010)

Shri G.Madhavan Nair (2003-2009)Home/About/Former
                                    chairman/Shri G Madhavan Nair



Shri G Madhavan Nairwas born on October 31,1943 in
                                                Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala. He graduated in Engineering from Kerala
                                                University in 1966 and underwent training at Bhabha Atomic Research
                                                Center (BARC), Bombay. He joined Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) in 1967.

Since then, he has held various positions posting illustrious milestones
                                                on his way to the position of Chairman ISRO. During his tenure of six
                                                years as Chairman, ISRO/Secretary, DOS, 25 successful missions were
                                                accomplished.INSAT-3E, RESOURCESAT-1, EDUSAT, CARTOSAT-1, HAMSAT-1,
                                                INSAT-4A, PSLV-C5, GSLV-F1, PSLV-C6, CARTOSAT-2, INSAT-4B, SRE-1,
                                                PSLV-C7, PSLV-C8, GSLV-F04, INSAT-4CR, PSLV-C10, CARTOSAT-2A, IMS-1,
                                                PSLV-C9, CHANDRAYAAN-1, PSLV-C11, PSLV-12, PSLV-C14 and OCEANSAT-2. He had taken initiatives towards development of futuristic technologies
                                                to enhance the space systems capabilities as well as to reduce the cost
                                                of access to space. He had given major thrust for evolving application
                                                programmes such as tele-education and telemedicine for meeting the needs
                                                of society at large.

As on today, more than 31,000 classrooms have been connected under the
                                                EDUSAT network and telemedicine is extended to 315 hospitals - 269 in
                                                remote/rural/district hospitals including 10 mobile units and 46 super
                                                speciality hospitals. He has initiated schemes for Village Resource Centres through satellite
                                                connectivity which aims at improving the quality of life of the poor
                                                people in the villages. More than 430 VRCs are facilitating access to
                                                spatial information on important aspects like land use/land cover, soil
                                                and ground water prospects and enable the farmers in taking important
                                                decisions based on their query. VRCs also enable online interaction between the local farmers and
                                                agricultural scientists.

It also provides information of many
                                                governmental schemes, farming system, action plans based on weather,
                                                community specific advice on soil and water conservation, etc. In his role as the Director of VSSC from 1999 till he took over the
                                                present position, Shri G.Madhavan Nair led VSSC, the largest Centre of
                                                ISRO with about six thousand employees working in various engineering
                                                and scientific disciplines towards the development of India's
                                                Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle - GSLV capable of orbiting 2000
                                                kg class of satellite into Geo Transfer Orbit, which had its successful
                                                flight in the very first attempt, and declared operational after its
                                                successful flight in 2003. B.Sc (Engineering), (1966), Kerala
                                                                    University with
                                                                    specialisation in Electrical & Communication. One year training at BARC Training School, (1967),
                                                                    Bombay

Padma Vibhushan
                                                                    (2009).

Padma Bhushan
                                                                    (1998). D.Philosophy
                                                                    (Honoris Causa) conferred
                                                                    by Punjab Technical University, Jalandhar (2003). D.Sc (Honoris
                                                                    Causa) conferred by Sri
                                                                    Venkateswara University, Tirupati (2004). Honoris Causa
                                                                    Doctor of Science
                                                                    conferred by Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi
                                                                    (2004).

Honoris Causa
                                                                    Degree of Doctor of
                                                                    Science Award by Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya,
                                                                    Jabalpur (2005). D.Sc from
                                                                    Indira Gandhi National Open
                                                                    University, Delhi (2005). D.Sc from
                                                                    Cochin University of Science
                                                                    and Technology, Kochi (2006). Honoris Causa
                                                                    from University of Mysore
                                                                    ( 2006).

Honoris Causa
                                                                    from GJ University,
                                                                    Hissar (2006). Honoria Causa
                                                                    Degree of D.Sc conferred
                                                                    at the 4th Convocation of Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki
                                                                    Vishwavidyalaya, Bhopal
                                                                    (2007). Honorary Degree
                                                                    of D.Sc of the
                                                                    University of Kerala, Kerala (2007). Honorary
                                                                    Doctorate in Science conferred
                                                                    by SRM University, Chennai (2008).

Honorary
                                                                    Doctorate in Science conferred
                                                                    by Pt. Ravishankar Shukla University, Raipur (2009). Honorary
                                                                    Doctorate in Science conferred
                                                                    by Karnataka University, Dharwad (2009). Honorary
                                                                    Doctorate in Science (Honoris
                                                                    Causa) conferred by Indian Institute of Technology,
                                                                    Mumbai (2009).

Honorary
                                                                    Doctorate in Science (Honoris
                                                                    Causa) conferred by Indian Institute of Technology,
                                                                    Kharagpur (2009). Fellow,
                                                                    Indian National
                                                                    Academy of Engineering. Fellow,
                                                                    Astronautical Society
                                                                    of India. Fellow,
                                                                    National Academy of
                                                                    Sciences, India.

Honorary
                                                                    Fellow, Indian
                                                                    Society for Non-Destruction Testing (ISNT). Member,
                                                                    System Society of
                                                                    India. Member,
                                                                    Working Committee of
                                                                    the Current Science Association 2004-06. Member,
                                                                    International Academy
                                                                    of Astronautics (2004).

Senior
                                                                    Associate, National
                                                                    Institute of Advanced Studies (2004-2007). President,
                                                                    Intersputnik Board
                                                                    (2005)

Honorary
                                                                    Fellow of The
                                                                    Aeronautical Society of India (2007). Chairman,
                                                                    Research Council of
                                                                    National Aerospace Laboratories (April 2007 to March
                                                                    2010).

2004 -
                                                                    President, Astronautical
                                                                    Society of India (ASI).

2005 -
                                                                    President, Aeronautical
                                                                    Society of India (AeSI).

2006-2007
                                                                    - Vice-President,
                                                                    Scientific Activities Committee of IAA.

2009-2010
                                                                    - General President,
                                                                    97th Indian Science Congress. Chairman,
                                                                    Space Commission &
                                                                    Secretary to Government of India, Department of
                                                                    Space, Bangalore.

Chairman,
                                                                    Indian Space Research
                                                                    Organization, Bangalore. Chairman,
                                                                    Governing Body,
                                                                    National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad (upto
                                                                    Sept. 2008). Chairman,
                                                                    Antrix Corporation
                                                                    Limited, Bangalore. Director,
                                                                    Vikram Sarabhai Space
                                                                    Centre, Trivandrum

Director,
                                                                    Liquid Propulsion
                                                                    Systems Centre, Trivandrum

Programme
                                                                    Director, ILVP, VSSC,
                                                                    Trivandrum

Project
                                                                    Director, PSLV,
                                                                    Trivandrum.

Associate
                                                                    Project Director, PSLV,
                                                                    Trivandrum. Head,Electronics
                                                                    Systems, VSSC,
                                                                    Trivandrum. Project
                                                                    Engineer, SLV-3 Project,
                                                                    Trivandrum. Project
                                                                    Manager, Telecommand
                                                                    System, VSSC, Trivandrum.

Head,
                                                                    Payload Integration
                                                                    Section, TERLS, Trivandrum.

"MP
                                                                    Birla Memorial Award 2009"
                                                                    from MP Birla Institute of Fundamental Research at
                                                                    Kolkata (July 4, 2009)

"Bhu
                                                                    Ratna" Award from the Soil
                                                                    Conservation Society of India at the National
                                                                    Conference on "Challenges and
                                                                    Opportunities of Bioindustrial Watershed Development
                                                                    for the Prosperity of
                                                                    the Farming Community" at the University of
                                                                    Agricultural Sciences, GKVK
                                                                    Campus, Bangalore (June 25, 2009).

"Bhu
                                                                    Ratna" Award from the Soil
                                                                    Conservation Society of India at the National
                                                                    Conference on "Challenges and
                                                                    Opportunities of Bioindustrial Watershed Development
                                                                    for the Prosperity of
                                                                    the Farming Community" at the University of
                                                                    Agricultural Sciences, GKVK
                                                                    Campus, Bangalore (June 25, 2009).

"Mohamed
                                                                    Abdu Rahiman Sahib
                                                                    National Award" from Mohamed Abdu Rahman Sahib
                                                                    Foundation, Kodungallur,
                                                                    Thrissur (June 19, 2009).

"
                                                                    Lakshmipat Singhania - IIM,
                                                                    Lucknow National Leadership Award 2008" from the
                                                                    Indian Institute of
                                                                    Management, Lucknow at ND (June 10, 2009) .

"AV Rama
                                                                    Rao Technology Award"
                                                                    from Indian Institute of Chemical Technology,
                                                                    Hyderabad. (cash prize 1 lakh)
                                                                    (May 11, 2009).

"Chanakya"
                                                                    Award in the area of
                                                                    Technology Innovative Leadership from Public
                                                                    Relations Council of India at
                                                                    Bangalore (April 3, 2009).

"Man of
                                                                    the Year" form Limca
                                                                    Book of Records, 2009 at New Delhi (March 31, 2009).

"Special
                                                                    Achievement Award" for
                                                                    contribution towards Science & Technology from the
                                                                    International Institute
                                                                    of Planning & Management&
                                                                    The Sunday Indian State Excellence Awards, 2008 at
                                                                    The Leela Palace,
                                                                    Bangalore (March 25, 2009).

"Yashwantrao
                                                                    Chavan National
                                                                    Award 2008" from Yashwantrao Chavan Pratishthan,
                                                                    Mumbai on the occasion of the 96th Birth Anniversary
                                                                    of Shri.Yashwantrao
                                                                    Chavan (March 12, 2009).

"Kururamma
                                                                    Award" from Kururamma
                                                                    Tempan, Guruvayoor (March 4, 2009).

"Public
                                                                    Service Excellence
                                                                    Award" from All Indian Management Association at the
                                                                    All India Management
                                                                    Association Foundation Day at Delhi (2009). NASSCOM's
                                                                    Global Leadership
                                                                    "Award for Vision" for 2008-09 from NASSCOM at
                                                                    Mumbai (2009).

"Newsmaker
                                                                    2008" - Manorama News
                                                                    Award at Trivandrum (2009).

"Bharat
                                                                    Asmita Shreshtatva
                                                                    Award-2009" from MIT School of Government, Pune, at
                                                                    New Delhi (2009).

"CNN-IBN
                                                                    Indian of the Year
                                                                    2008" in Public Service Category (2009).

"AK Nair
                                                                    Memorial Award" from
                                                                    The North Malabar Chamber of Commerce by AK Nair
                                                                    Endowment Committee at
                                                                    Kannur (2009).

"NDTV
                                                                    Indian of The Year" Award
                                                                    at New Delhi (2009). Raja
                                                                    Rammohan Puraskar" award on
                                                                    the 236th birth anniversary of Raja Rammohan Roy at
                                                                    Kolkata (2008)

M M
                                                                    Chugani award for 2006,
                                                                    confered by Indian Physics Association at IIT Mumbai
                                                                    (2008).

"Bharat
                                                                    Shiromani Award 2006"
                                                                    from Shiromani Institute, New Delhi (2007).

"Shankar
                                                                    Ratna" award from
                                                                    Shankara Netralaya - a unit of Medical Research
                                                                    Foundation, Chennai (2007). Dr.

A S
                                                                    G Jayakar Award from the
                                                                    Science India Forum, Muscat and the Indian Institute
                                                                    of Scientific Heritage
                                                                    - Oman Chapter (2007).

"9th Sri
                                                                    Chandrasekarendra
                                                                    Saraswathi National Eminence Award" in the field of
                                                                    Science & Technology
                                                                    from The South Indian Education Society, Mumbai
                                                                    (2006). Gold
                                                                    Medal from the Prime
                                                                    Minister at the 94th Indian Science Congress at
                                                                    Chidambaram (2007).

"Sasthra
                                                                    Ratna" Purskara from
                                                                    the Pazhassi Raja Charitable Trust, Kozhikode
                                                                    (2006). The
                                                                    First "Sree Chithira
                                                                    Thirunal Award" from Sree Chithira Thirunal Trust,
                                                                    Thiruvananthapuram.

"Lokmanya
                                                                    Tilak Award" from
                                                                    Tilak Smarak Trust, Pune (2006). Honoured
                                                                    by the
                                                                    Lakshmikanthammal Educational Trust for outstanding
                                                                    contribution to the
                                                                    field of Indian Space Research at RMK Engineering
                                                                    College, Thiruvallur
                                                                    (2006).

"Best
                                                                    R&D Man of the Year"
                                                                    Corporate Excellence Award - 2005 from the
                                                                    Foundation of Indian Industry &
                                                                    Economists at ND.(2006).

Fifth
                                                                    "Shri Balvantbhai Parekh
                                                                    Award" from The Indian Planetary Society,Mumbai
                                                                    (2006). H.K.Firodia
                                                                    Award 2005 from
                                                                    H.K.Firodia Memorial Foundation, Pune (2005). Dr. Yelavarthy Nayudamma
                                                                    Memorial Award - 2004 from Dr.Y.Nayudamma Memorial
                                                                    Trust, Tenali, Andhra
                                                                    Pradesh (2005).

Benedict
                                                                    Mar Gregorios Award
                                                                    from The Association of Mar Ivanios College Old
                                                                    Students, Trivandrum (2005).

10th
                                                                    Science & Technology Award
                                                                    for Excellence for the year 2003-2004 from
                                                                    Sathyabama Deemed University,
                                                                    Chennai (2005). Raja Sir
                                                                    Muthiah Chettiar
                                                                    Endowment Award from Crescent Engineering College,
                                                                    Chennai (2004). Fellow,
                                                                    Astronautical Society of
                                                                    India. Melpadom
                                                                    Attumail Georgekutty
                                                                    Award from Mar Thoma Syrian Church of Malabar,
                                                                    Thiruvalla (2004).

Vikram
                                                                    Sarabhai Memorial Gold
                                                                    Medal of the Indian Science Congress Association -
                                                                    January 2003

Swadeshi
                                                                    Sastra Puraskar Award -
                                                                    1995

Shri Om
                                                                    Prakash Bhasin Award -
                                                                    1995

FIE
                                                                    Foundation's Award - 1994

National
                                                                    Aeronautical Award -
                                                                    1994

Dr.Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan(1994-2003)Home/About/Former chairman/Dr.Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan

Dr. Krishnaswamy Kasturiranganis presently Member of
                                                Planning Commission. Dr. Kasturirangan has steered the Indian Space
                                                programme gloriously for over 9 years as Chairman of the Indian Space
                                                Research Organisation, of Space Commission and Secretary to the
                                                Government of India in the Department of Space, before laying down his
                                                office on August 27, 2003.He was earlier the Director of ISRO Satellite Centre, where he oversaw
                                                the activities related to the development of new generation spacecraft,
                                                Indian National Satellite (INSAT-2) and Indian Remote Sensing Satellites
                                                (IRS-1A & 1B) as well as scientific satellites.

He was also the Project Director for India's first two experimental
                                                earth observation satellites, BHASKARA-I & II and subsequently was
                                                responsible for overall direction of the first operational Indian Remote
                                                Sensing Satellite, IRS-1A. Dr. Kasturirangan took his Bachelor of Science with Honours and Master
                                                of Science degrees in Physics from Bombay University and received his
                                                Doctorate Degree in Experimental High Energy Astronomy in 1971 working
                                                at the Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad. Under his leadership, as Chairman, ISRO, the space programme has
                                                witnessed several major milestones including the successful launching
                                                and operationalisation of the India's prestigious launch vehicle, the
                                                Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and more recently, the first
                                                successful flight testing of the all important Geosynchronous Satellite
                                                Launch Vehicle (GSLV).

Further, he has also overseen the design, development and launching of
                                                the world's best civilian satellites, IRS-1C and 1D, realization of the
                                                second generation and initiation of third generation INSAT satellites,
                                                besides launching ocean observation satellites IRS-P3/P4. These efforts
                                                have put India as a pre-eminent space-faring nation among the handful of
                                                six countries that have major space programmes. As an Astrophysicist, Dr. Kasturirangan's interest includes research in
                                                high energy X-ray and gamma ray astronomy as well as optical astronomy.

He has made extensive and significant contributions to studies of Cosmic
                                                x-ray sources, celestial gamma-ray and effect of cosmic x-rays in the
                                                lower atmosphere. Dr. Kasturirangan is a member of several important scientific academies,
                                                both within India and abroad. He is presently the President of the
                                                Indian Academy of Sciences at Bangalore and General President of the
                                                Indian Science Congress.

He is a Fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences, Indian National
                                                Science Academy, National Academy of Sciences of India, Indian National
                                                Academy of Engineering, Astronautical Society of India, National
                                                Telematics Forum, The Indian Meteorological Society and The Third World
                                                Academy of Sciences. He is a Distinguished Fellow of the Institution of Electronics and
                                                Telecommunications Engineers, Founder Member of the Astronomical Society
                                                of India, Life Member of the Indian Physics Association, Indian Science
                                                Congress Association and Indian Society of Remote Sensing and Honorary
                                                Fellow of the Aeronautical Society of India and Kerala Academy of
                                                Sciences. He is also a Member of the International Astronomical Union and the
                                                International Academy of Astronautics and is a member of its Board of
                                                Trustees. He has chaired some of the prestigious international
                                                committees, such as, the International Committee on Earth Observation
                                                Satellites (CEOS), Panel for Space Research in Developing countries of
                                                COSPAR/ICSU, and the committee meeting at senior official level of
                                                UN-ESCAP, that led to the adoption of the "Delhi Declaration" by the
                                                Ministers of the region (1999-2000).

He is also the Chairman of the Governing Board of the UN Centre for
                                                Space Science & Technology Education (UN-CSSTE), of the Board of
                                                Governors of IIT Chennai, of the Governing Council of the Raman Research
                                                Institute and Research Council of the National Aerospace Laboratory. He has won several awards including Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Award in
                                                Engineering, Shri Hari Om Ashram Dr.Vikram Sarabhai Prerit Award in
                                                Aerospace, M.P.Birla Memorial Award in Astronomy, Shri M.M.Chugani
                                                Memorial Award in Applied Science, H.K.Firodia Award in Science
                                                Technology, RathindraPuraskar by Visvabharati, Santiniketan, Dr.M.N.Saha
                                                Birth Centenary Medal for outstanding contributions in the field of
                                                Space. He has been conferred Padma Shri, Padma Bhushan and Padma Vibhushan. He
                                                has published more than 200 papers, both in international and national
                                                journals in the areas of astronomy, space science, space applications
                                                and has edited 6 books.

Shri.Hari Om Ashram
                                                                    Dr.Vikram Sarabhai
                                                                    Prerit Award (1981)

Award
                                                                    of Intercosmos Council
                                                                    of the Soviet
                                                                    Academy of Sciences (1981)

Shanti
                                                                    SwarupBhatnagar Award
                                                                    in Engineering
                                                                    Sciences (1983

Shri.OmPrakashBhasin
                                                                    Foundation Award
                                                                    (1988). Award
                                                                    of the Institution of
                                                                    Engineers
                                                                    (India), Karnataka (1992)

Dr.Y.Nayudamma
                                                                    Memorial Award (1995). Dr.K.R.Ramanathan
                                                                    Memorial
                                                                    Gold Medal for
                                                                    1995 conferred by Indian Geo-Physical Union (1995)

FIE
                                                                    Foundation's 1995
                                                                    National Award
                                                                    (1996). G.P.Chatterjee
                                                                    Memorial
                                                                    Award (1997) of ISCA

M.P.Birla
                                                                    Memorial Award in
                                                                    Astronomy
                                                                    (1997).

Goyal
                                                                    Award conferred by
                                                                    Goyal Foundation
                                                                    (1997). Biren
                                                                    Roy Memorial Lecture
                                                                    Medal of the
                                                                    Indian Physical Society, Calcutta (1998). Outstanding
                                                                    Achievement in
                                                                    Indigenization
                                                                    Award of the Lakshmikanthammal Education Trust,
                                                                    Chennai (1999). VidyaRatna
                                                                    National Award of
                                                                    Subbaram Trust,
                                                                    Bangalore (1999)

Shri
                                                                    Murli M.Chugani Memorial
                                                                    Award for
                                                                    Excellence in Applied Physics of Indian Physics
                                                                    Association (1999).

H.K.Firodia
                                                                    Award for
                                                                    Excellence in Science
                                                                    & Technology by H.K.Firodia Memorial Foundation
                                                                    (1999)

IGU
                                                                    Millenium Award by
                                                                    Indian Geophysical
                                                                    Union (1999). M.N.Saha
                                                                    Birth Centenary
                                                                    Award for 1999-2000
                                                                    conferred by 87th Indian Science Congress (2000). Aryabhata
                                                                    Medal Award 2000
                                                                    conferred by
                                                                    Indian National Science Academy, Calcutta (2001)

4th
                                                                    Sri
                                                                    ChandrasekarendraSaraswati National
                                                                    Eminence Award by South Indian Education Society,
                                                                    Mumbai on
                                                                    28/12/2001(2001). International
                                                                    Collaboration
                                                                    Accomplishment
                                                                    Award 2001'conferred by International Society for
                                                                    Air Breathing
                                                                    Engines(ISOABE),Bangalore.

RathindhraPuraskar'
                                                                    for the
                                                                    year 1999 by
                                                                    Visvabharati, Santiniketan (2002). Award of "Officer of the
                                                                    Legion d'honneur",
                                                                    the highest decoration given by the Government of
                                                                    France (2002)

"V.Krishnamurthy Award for
                                                                    Excellence"conferred by Centre for Organisation
                                                                    Development, Hyderabad
                                                                    (2002)

"G.M.Modi Award" for
                                                                    outstanding
                                                                    contribution in innovative Science, conferred by
                                                                    GujarmalModi Science
                                                                    foundation, New Delhi (2002)

'BhoovigyanRatna Award'
                                                                    from
                                                                    BhoovigyanVikas Foundation, New Delhi (2002)

8th
                                                                    National Science &
                                                                    Technology Award for
                                                                    Excellence by the Jeppiaar Educational Trust,
                                                                    Chennai (2003)

'6th Ram Mohan Puraskar
                                                                    2003' awarded by
                                                                    Ram Mohan Mission, Calcutta (2003).

'AsutoshMookerjee Memorial
                                                                    Award' by the
                                                                    Indian Science Congress, Chandigarh (2004)

'Man of the Year' award by
                                                                    the Centenarian
                                                                    Trust, Chennai (2004)

'Prof. M.N.Saha Memorial
                                                                    Lecture Medal' of
                                                                    the National Academy of Sciences of India, Jaipur
                                                                    (2004)

'Life Time Contribution
                                                                    Award in
                                                                    Engineering' for 2004 by Indian National Academy of
                                                                    Engineering, Delhi
                                                                    (2004).

'ISPRS Brock Medal'
                                                                    instituted jointly by
                                                                    ISPRS and ASPRS, Istanbul, Turkey (2004). Allan
                                                                    D Emil Memorial Award
                                                                    of the
                                                                    International Astronautical Federation (IAF),
                                                                    Vancouver, Canada (2004).

'Balvantbhai Parekh Gold
                                                                    Medal 2005' for
                                                                    life-time Achievements in Space Science by The
                                                                    Indian Planetary Society,
                                                                    Mumbai
                                                                    (2005).

'Aryabhata Award 2003' by
                                                                    Astronautical
                                                                    Society of India (2005).

'Lifetime
                                                                    Achievement Award'
                                                                    of the
                                                                    Asia-Pacific Satellite communications Council,
                                                                    Singapore (2005).

'LakshmipatSinghania - IIM
                                                                    Lucknow National
                                                                    Leadership Award 2006' by Indian Institute of
                                                                    Management, Lucknow (2006).

The
                                                                    Jewel of Ruia Award by
                                                                    Ruia College
                                                                    Alumni Association,
                                                                    ShikshanaPrasarakaMandali'sRamnarainRuia College,
                                                                    Dec.
                                                                    2007. Theodore Von Karman Award
                                                                    by International
                                                                    Academy of Astronautics (IAA), France (2007)

MaharanaUdai Singh Award by
                                                                    Maharana of
                                                                    Mewar Charitable Foundation in Udaipur, March 2,
                                                                    2008

Rajayogindra Award,
                                                                    Maharaja of Mysore,
                                                                    Mysore, 18 July 2008

Vikram
                                                                    Sarabhai Memorial
                                                                    Gold Medal, 96th
                                                                    Indian Science Congress,The Indian Science Congress
                                                                    Association,3January
                                                                    2009Shillong

ShasthraBhooshan Award by
                                                                    His Highness
                                                                    Pazhassi Raja Charitable Trust, Kerala, 27 February
                                                                    2009. Prof Y. T.

Thathachari
                                                                    Lifetime Achievement
                                                                    Award by Bhramara Trust of Prof. Y T Thathachari and
                                                                    Smt. MadhuriThathachari
                                                                    of
                                                                    Mysore on March 14, 2009

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by Banaras Hindu University (1994)

D.Sc (Honorary
                                                                    Degree)
                                                                    conferred by Andhra University (1995)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) by
                                                                    S.V.University, Tirupati (1996)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) by Sri
                                                                    Krishna Devaraya University, Ananthpur (1998)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) by Anna
                                                                    University, Chennai(1998)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by Roorkee University, Roorkee (1999)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by IIT, Bombay (2000)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by ChatrapatiShahuJiMaharaj University, Kanpur
                                                                    (2000)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) by
                                                                    Roorkee University, Amritsar (2001)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) by
                                                                    University of Calcutta (2002)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU),
                                                                    New Delhi (2003)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by Panjab University, Chandigarh (2003)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by Visvesvaraya Technological University, Belgaum
                                                                    (2004)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by Alagappa University, Karaikudi (2006)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by Mysore University, Mysore (2007)

D.Sc
                                                                    (HonorisCausa) conferred
                                                                    by SRM University , Chennai (2008)

Prof. Udupi Ramachandra Rao (1984-1994)Home/About/Former chairman/Prof.

Udupi Ramachandra Rao

Prof U R Raowas an internationally renowned space
                                                scientist who had made original contributions to the development of
                                                space technology in India and its extensive application to
                                                communications and remote sensing of natural resources. He was the Chairman of the Governing Council of the Physical Research
                                                Laboratory at Ahmedabad and the Chancellor of the Indian Institute of
                                                Space science and Technology at Thiruvananthapuram. After working as a
                                                Faculty Member at MIT and Assistant Professor at University of Texas at
                                                Dallas where he carried out investigations as a prime experimenter on a
                                                number of Pioneer and Explorer spacecrafts, Prof. Rao returned to India
                                                in 1966 as Professor at the Physical Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad

Convinced of the imperative need to use space technology for rapid
                                                development, Prof.

Rao undertook the responsibility for the
                                                establishment of satellite technology in India in 1972. Under his
                                                guidance, beginning with the first Indian satellite 'Aryabhata' in 1975,
                                                over 18 satellites were designed and launched for providing
                                                communication, remote sensing and meteorological services. After taking charge as Chairman, Space Commission and Secretary,
                                                Department of Space in 1984, Prof. Rao accelerated the development of
                                                rocket technology, resulting in the successful launch of ASLV rocket and
                                                the operational PSLV launch vehicle, which can launch 2.0 ton class of
                                                satellites into polar orbit.

Prof. Rao initiated the development of the geostationary launch vehicle
                                                GSLV and the development of cryogenic technology in 1991. Prof Rao has published over 350 scientific and technical papers covering
                                                cosmic rays, interplanetary physics, high energy astronomy, space
                                                applications and satellite and rocket technology and authored many
                                                books.He is also the recipient of D.Sc. (Hon. Causa) Degree from over 21
                                                Universities including University of Bologna, the oldest University in
                                                Europe.

Prof Rao was awarded 'Padma Bhushan' by the Government of India in 1976,
                                                which is the third highest Civilian Award and ‘Padma Vibhushan’ in 2017
                                                which is the second highest Civilian Award. Prof. U.R. Rao became the
                                                first Indian Space Scientist to be inducted into the highly Prestigious
                                                “Satellite Hall of Fame” at Washington DC, USA on March 19, 2013.

Prof. U.R. Rao became the first Indian Space Scientist to be inducted into the
                                                highly Prestigious “IAF Hall of Fame” at Guadalajara, Mexico. Bachelor of
                                                                    Sciences from Madras
                                                                    University, India, 1951,

MS from
                                                                    Banaras Hindu University,
                                                                    India 1953

Ph.D. from
                                                                    Gujarat University,
                                                                    India 1960

D.

Litt. (Hon. Causa) from
                                                                    Kannada University, Hampi. D.Sc (Hons. Causa) from the
                                                                    Universities of:

1976 Mysore
                                                                    ,1976 Rahuri,
                                                                    1981 Calcutta, 1984 Mangalore,

1992 Banaras,
                                                                    1992 Udaipur,
                                                                    1993 Tirupati (SV), 1994 Hyderabad (JN)

1994 Madras
                                                                    (Anna
                                                                    University), 1994 Roorkee University,

1995 Punjabi
                                                                    University,

1997
                                                                    ShriShahuJiMaharaj University,

Patiala Kanpur,
                                                                    1999 Indian School of
                                                                    Mines, Dhanbad,

2001 D.Litt.
                                                                    (Hons.

Causa)
                                                                    from Kannada University, Hampi

2002 Ch. Charan
                                                                    Singh
                                                                    University, Meerut,

2005 UP
                                                                    Technical University,
                                                                    Lucknow

2006
                                                                    Viswesvaraiah Technical
                                                                    University, Belgaum,

2007 Indian
                                                                    Institute of
                                                                    Technology - Delhi,

2010 Dr. D.Y. Patil Vidyapeeth, Pune

2012 National
                                                                    Institute of Technology, Agarthala

2013 Bangalore
                                                                    University

2013 Indian
                                                                    Institute of Technology - Bhubaneswar

2014
                                                                    Vijayanagara Sri Krishnadevaraya University, Bellary

1992 University
                                                                    of Bologna (Italy)

Fellow
                                                                    of the Indian Academy
                                                                    of
                                                                    Sciences

Fellow
                                                                    of the Indian National
                                                                    Science
                                                                    Academy

Fellow
                                                                    of National Science
                                                                    Academy

Fellow
                                                                    of Third World Academy
                                                                    of
                                                                    Sciences

Fellow
                                                                    of the International
                                                                    Academy of
                                                                    Astronautics

Fellow
                                                                    of Indian National
                                                                    Academy of
                                                                    Engineering

Fellow
                                                                    of the Astronautical
                                                                    Society of
                                                                    India.

Hon. Fellow of the
                                                                    Aeronautical
                                                                    Society. Distinguished
                                                                    Fellow
                                                                    Institution of
                                                                    Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers

Hon. Fellow of Indian
                                                                    National
                                                                    Cartographic Association

Fellow
                                                                    of Broadcasting and
                                                                    Engineering
                                                                    Society of India

Hon.

Fellow Aero Medical
                                                                    Society of
                                                                    India

Distinguished
                                                                    Fellow of
                                                                    Physical
                                                                    Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad

Fellow
                                                                    of World Academy of
                                                                    Arts &
                                                                    Sciences, USA.

1988

-
                                                                    Chairman, PRL Council,
                                                                    ISRO-DOS.

2005

Chairman,
                                                                    Karnataka Science
                                                                    &
                                                                    Technology Academy

2007

Additional
                                                                    Director,
                                                                    Bharatiya
                                                                    Reserve Bank Note Mudran Pvt. Ltd., Bangalore

Chairman, Governing Council
                                                                    of
                                                                    Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune

President, Centre for Space
                                                                    Physics,
                                                                    Kolkata

2006 - 2011

Chancellor,
                                                                    BabasahebBhimraoAmbedkarUnversity, Lucknow

2006 - 2010

Member,
                                                                    Central Board of
                                                                    Directors,
                                                                    Reserve Bank of India.

1997

Co-Chairman,
                                                                    Governing
                                                                    Council of
                                                                    National Center for Antarctic & Ocean Research, Goa

2001
                                                                    Member, PrasarBharati
                                                                    Board

2000
                                                                    Chairman, United
                                                                    Nations -
                                                                    Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
                                                                    (UN-COPUOS)

1984 - 1994

Chairman,
                                                                    Space
                                                                    Commission/Secretary,
                                                                    Department of Space, Government of India & Chairman,
                                                                    Indian Space Research
                                                                    Organisation (ISRO), Bangalore.

1981 - 2001

Member,
                                                                    Space Commission,
                                                                    Government
                                                                    of India

2001 - 2002

Chairman,
                                                                    PrasarBharati
                                                                    Board

1997 - 2001

Member,
                                                                    PrasarBharati Board

1998 - 2001

Member,
                                                                    National Security
                                                                    Advisory
                                                                    Board

1997 - 2000

Chairman,
                                                                    United Nations -
                                                                    Committee
                                                                    on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space (UN-COPUOS)

1975 - 1984

Director,
                                                                    ISRO Satellite
                                                                    Centre,
                                                                    Bangalore

1975 - 1984

Dr. Vikram Sarabhai
                                                                    Distinguished
                                                                    Professor of the Department of Space

1972 - 1975

Project
                                                                    Director, Indian
                                                                    Scientific
                                                                    Satellite Project, Bangalore

1969 - 1972

Professor,
                                                                    Physical Research
                                                                    Laboratory, Ahmedabad

1966 - 1969

Associate
                                                                    Professor,
                                                                    Physical
                                                                    Research Laboratory, Ahmedabad

1963 - 1966

Asst. Professor at S.W.

Centre for
                                                                    Advanced Research, Dallas, Texas

1961 - 1963

Post
                                                                    DoctoralFellow MIT, USA

1986-1992
                                                                    Vice President,
                                                                    International Astronautical Federation

1988
                                                                    to date President,
                                                                    Committee
                                                                    for Liaison with Developing Nations (CLODIN) of IAF

1997-2000
                                                                    Chairman,
                                                                    UN-COPUOS
                                                                    (United Nations - Committee on Peaceful Uses of
                                                                    Outer Space).

1999
                                                                    President, UNISPACE-III
                                                                    Conference.

2007 Chairman, 30th
                                                                    International Antarctic Treaty Consultative
                                                                    Committee Meeting

Organised Special Plenary Current Event Sessions as
                                                                    a part of International Astronautical Federation
                                                                    Congress

1987 Use of Space Technology for the benefit of
                                                                    Human Kind, at Brighton (IAF)

1988 Space and Drought Management at Bangalore,
                                                                    India (IAF)

1989 Space and Flood Management at Malaga, Spain
                                                                    (IAF)

1990 Space and Forest Management at Dresden, Germany
                                                                    (IAF)

1991 Space and Agriculture Management at Montreal,
                                                                    Canada (IAF)

1992 Space and Developing Countries at Washington,
                                                                    USA (IAF)

1993 Space and Environment at Graz, Austria (IAF)

1994 Space and Rural Development at Jerusalem,
                                                                    Israel (IAF)

1995 Space for Education, Health Care and
                                                                    Environmental Monitoring at Oslo, Norway (IAF)

1996 Population Dynamics and Management of Urban
                                                                    Environment at Beijing, China (IAF)

1997 Space and Industrial Partnership for Rapid
                                                                    Development, Turin, Italy (IAF)

1998 Space in Transitioning Economic Scenario,
                                                                    Melbourne, Australia (IAF)

1999 Space Technology for Sustainable Economic
                                                                    Growth, Amsterdam, Netherlands (IAF)

2000 Space in the Next Millennium - Towards an
                                                                    Equitable Village at Rio de Jeneiro, Brazil (IAF)

2001 Space & Information Technology - From Digital
                                                                    Divide to Digital Bridge at Toulouse, France (IAF)

2002 Director - Summer Design Project on "Space for
                                                                    Enhancing Human Health" for the International Space
                                                                    University at Pomona, California (ISU)

2002
                                                                    Space Solutions for Global Problems: Building
                                                                    Partnership with All Stakeholders in Human Security
                                                                    and Development at Houstan, USA (IAF)

2003 Space for Enhancement of Carrying Capacity at
                                                                    Bremen, Germany (IAF)

2004 National Disaster Management on a Global Scale"
                                                                    at Vancouver, Canada (IAF)

2005 Space Education and Capacity Building for
                                                                    Sustainable Development at Fukuoka, Japan (IAF)

2006 Use of Space Technology for Water Resource
                                                                    Management at Valencia, Spain (IAF)

2007 Space
                                                                    Technology for Poverty Alleviation at Hyderabad,
                                                                    India (IAF)

President of UNISPACE III Conference, Vienna in 1979

Led
                                                                    Indian Delegation in COPUOS and S&T Sub Committee of
                                                                    COPUOS from 1980 to 1994, UNISPACE-II in 1982 and
                                                                    President UNISPACE-III in 2000. Chairman of the UN Committee on Peaceful Uses of
                                                                    Outer Space (1996-1999)

Published over 360 Scientific and Technical papers
                                                                    in various Journals.

"Perspectives
                                                                    in Communications"
                                                                    (1987), World Scientific Pub. Co. Pvt.Ltd.

"Space and
                                                                    Agenda 21 - Caring for
                                                                    Planet Earth" (1995) Prism Books Pvt Ltd
                                                                    (Bangalore).

"Space
                                                                    Technology for Sustainable
                                                                    Development" (1996) - Tata McCraw Hill Pub., New
                                                                    Delhi

1976 Padma
                                                                Bhushan

2017 Padma
                                                                Vibhushan

1973 Group
                                                                Achievement Award by NASA, USA

1975 Medal
                                                                of Honour by Academy of Sciences, USSR

1975
                                                                Karnataka Rajyotsava Award

1975 Hari Om
                                                                Vikram Sarabhai Award

1975 Shanti
                                                                Swarup Bhatnagar Award

1980
                                                                National Design Award

1980 Vasvik
                                                                Research Award

1983 Karnataka
                                                                Rajyotsava Award

1987 PC
                                                                Mahalnobis Medal

1993
                                                                MeghnadSaha Medal

1994 P.C.Chandra
                                                                Puraskar Award

1994
                                                                Electronics Man of the Year Award

1995 Om
                                                                Bhasin Award

1995 Zaheer
                                                                Hussain Memorial Award

1995
                                                                Aryabhata Award

1995
                                                                Jawaharhal Nehru Award

1996 SK
                                                                Mitra Birth Centenary Gold Medal

1997 Yudhvir
                                                                Foundation Award

1997
                                                                Rabindranath Tagore Award of Viswa Bharati University

1999 Gujar
                                                                Mal Modi Science Foundation Award

2001 Nadoja
                                                                Award from Kannada University, Hampi

2001 Life
                                                                Time Contribution Award in Engineering of INAE

2002 Sir M.

Visvesvaraya Memorial Award

2003 Press
                                                                Bureau of India Award

2004 Star of
                                                                India Award from Vishwabharathy Foundation, Hyderabad

2004 Special
                                                                Award 2004, Karnataka Media Academy

2007 Life
                                                                Time Achievement Award of Indian Space Research
                                                                Organisation

2007
                                                                Distinguished Scientist Gold Medal of the Karnataka
                                                                Science & Technology Academy

2007
                                                                Vishwamanava Award

2008
                                                                Jawaharlal Nehru Birth Centenary Award for 2007-2008
                                                                from ISCA

2008 A.V. Rama Rao Technology Award

2009 Hari Om
                                                                Ashram Prerit Senior Scientist Award-2008

2010 ISCA
                                                                General President Gold Medal Awardrd

2011
                                                                Sivananda Eminent Citizen Award

1991 Yuri
                                                                Gagarin Medal of USSR

1992 Allan D
                                                                Emil Award on International Cooperation

1994 Frank J
                                                                Malina Award (International Astronautical Federation)

1996 Vikram
                                                                Sarabhai Medal of COSPAR

1997
                                                                "Outstanding Book Award" of the International Academy of
                                                                Astronautics for the Book "Space Technology for
                                                                Sustainable Development"

2000 Eduard
                                                                Dolezal Award of ISPRS

2004 The
                                                                prestigious Space Magazine, Space News has named Prof. U.R. Rao as one of the Top 10 International Space
                                                                Personalities who have made a substantial difference in
                                                                civil, commerce and military space in the world since
                                                                1989

2005
                                                                Theodore Von Karman Award which is the highest Award of
                                                                the International Academy of Astronautics

2013 Prof.

U.R. Rao became the first Indian Space Scientist to be
                                                                inducted into the highly Prestigious “Satellite Hall of
                                                                Fame” at Washington DC, USA

2016 Prof. U.R. Rao became the first Indian Space Scientist to be
                                                                inducted into the highly Prestigious “IAF Hall of Fame”
                                                                at Guadalajara, Mexico

"MP Birla
                                                                Memorial Award 2009" from
                                                                MP
                                                                Birla Institute of Fundamental Research at Kolkata (July
                                                                4, 2009)

"Bhu Ratna"
                                                                Award from the Soil
                                                                Conservation
                                                                Society of India at the National Conference on
                                                                "Challenges and Opportunities of
                                                                Bioindustrial Watershed Development for the Prosperity
                                                                of the Farming Community"
                                                                at the University of Agricultural Sciences, GKVK Campus,
                                                                Bangalore (June 25,
                                                                2009).

"Bhu Ratna"
                                                                Award from the Soil
                                                                Conservation
                                                                Society of India at the National Conference on
                                                                "Challenges and Opportunities of
                                                                Bioindustrial Watershed Development for the Prosperity
                                                                of the Farming Community"
                                                                at the University of Agricultural Sciences, GKVK Campus,
                                                                Bangalore (June 25,
                                                                2009).

"Mohamed
                                                                Abdu Rahiman Sahib National
                                                                Award"
                                                                from Mohamed Abdu Rahman Sahib Foundation, Kodungallur,
                                                                Thrissur (June 19,
                                                                2009).

" Lakshmipat
                                                                Singhania - IIM,
                                                                Lucknow
                                                                National Leadership Award 2008" from the Indian
                                                                Institute of Management, Lucknow
                                                                at ND (June 10, 2009) .

"AV Rama Rao
                                                                Technology Award" from
                                                                Indian
                                                                Institute of Chemical Technology, Hyderabad. (cash prize
                                                                1 lakh) (May 11, 2009).

"Chanakya"
                                                                Award in the area of
                                                                Technology
                                                                Innovative Leadership from Public Relations Council of
                                                                India at Bangalore (April
                                                                3, 2009).

"Man of the
                                                                Year" form Limca Book of
                                                                Records, 2009 at New Delhi (March 31, 2009).

"Special
                                                                Achievement Award" for
                                                                contribution
                                                                towards Science & Technology from the International
                                                                Institute of Planning &
                                                                Management&
                                                                The Sunday Indian State Excellence Awards, 2008 at The
                                                                Leela Palace, Bangalore
                                                                (March 25, 2009).

"Yashwantrao
                                                                Chavan National Award
                                                                2008"
                                                                from Yashwantrao Chavan Pratishthan,
                                                                Mumbai on the occasion of the 96th Birth Anniversary of
                                                                Shri.Yashwantrao Chavan
                                                                (March 12, 2009).

"Kururamma
                                                                Award" from Kururamma
                                                                Tempan,
                                                                Guruvayoor (March 4, 2009).

"Public
                                                                Service Excellence Award"
                                                                from All
                                                                Indian Management Association at the All India
                                                                Management Association Foundation
                                                                Day at Delhi (2009).

NASSCOM's
                                                                Global Leadership "Award
                                                                for
                                                                Vision" for 2008-09 from NASSCOM at Mumbai (2009).

"Newsmaker
                                                                2008" - Manorama News
                                                                Award at
                                                                Trivandrum (2009).

"Bharat
                                                                Asmita Shreshtatva
                                                                Award-2009" from
                                                                MIT School of Government, Pune, at New Delhi (2009).

"CNN-IBN
                                                                Indian of the Year 2008" in
                                                                Public
                                                                Service Category (2009).

"AK Nair
                                                                Memorial Award" from The
                                                                North
                                                                Malabar Chamber of Commerce by AK Nair Endowment
                                                                Committee at Kannur (2009).

"NDTV Indian
                                                                of The Year" Award at
                                                                New Delhi
                                                                (2009). Raja
                                                                Rammohan Puraskar" award on the
                                                                236th
                                                                birth anniversary of Raja Rammohan Roy at Kolkata (2008)

M M Chugani
                                                                award for 2006, confered
                                                                by
                                                                Indian Physics Association at IIT Mumbai (2008).

"Bharat
                                                                Shiromani Award 2006" from
                                                                Shiromani
                                                                Institute, New Delhi (2007).

"Shankar
                                                                Ratna" award from Shankara
                                                                Netralaya - a unit of Medical Research Foundation,
                                                                Chennai (2007). Dr. A S G
                                                                Jayakar Award from the
                                                                Science
                                                                India Forum, Muscat and the Indian Institute of
                                                                Scientific Heritage - Oman
                                                                Chapter (2007).

"9th Sri
                                                                Chandrasekarendra
                                                                Saraswathi
                                                                National Eminence Award" in the field of Science &
                                                                Technology from The South
                                                                Indian Education Society, Mumbai (2006).

Gold Medal
                                                                from the Prime Minister
                                                                at the
                                                                94th Indian Science Congress at Chidambaram (2007).

"Sasthra
                                                                Ratna" Purskara from the
                                                                Pazhassi
                                                                Raja Charitable Trust, Kozhikode (2006). The First
                                                                "Sree Chithira Thirunal
                                                                Award"
                                                                from Sree Chithira Thirunal Trust, Thiruvananthapuram.

"Lokmanya
                                                                Tilak Award" from Tilak
                                                                Smarak
                                                                Trust, Pune (2006). Honoured by
                                                                the Lakshmikanthammal
                                                                Educational Trust for outstanding contribution to the
                                                                field of Indian Space
                                                                Research at RMK Engineering College, Thiruvallur (2006).

"Best R&D
                                                                Man of the Year" Corporate
                                                                Excellence Award - 2005 from the Foundation of Indian
                                                                Industry & Economists at
                                                                ND.(2006). Fifth "Shri
                                                                Balvantbhai Parekh
                                                                Award" from
                                                                The Indian Planetary Society,Mumbai (2006).

H.K.Firodia
                                                                Award 2005 from
                                                                H.K.Firodia
                                                                Memorial Foundation, Pune (2005). Dr. Yelavarthy Nayudamma Memorial
                                                                Award -
                                                                2004 from Dr.Y.Nayudamma Memorial Trust, Tenali, Andhra
                                                                Pradesh (2005). Benedict Mar
                                                                Gregorios Award from
                                                                The
                                                                Association of Mar Ivanios College Old Students,
                                                                Trivandrum (2005).

10th Science
                                                                & Technology Award for
                                                                Excellence for the year 2003-2004 from Sathyabama Deemed
                                                                University, Chennai
                                                                (2005).

Raja Sir
                                                                Muthiah Chettiar Endowment
                                                                Award
                                                                from Crescent Engineering College, Chennai (2004). Fellow,
                                                                Astronautical Society of
                                                                India. Melpadom
                                                                Attumail Georgekutty Award
                                                                from Mar
                                                                Thoma Syrian Church of Malabar, Thiruvalla (2004). Personality
                                                                of the Decade Award from
                                                                KG
                                                                Foundation, Coimbatore (2004).

Vikram
                                                                Sarabhai Memorial Gold Medal
                                                                of the
                                                                Indian Science Congress Association - January 2003

Swadeshi
                                                                Sastra Puraskar Award -
                                                                1995

Shri Om
                                                                Prakash Bhasin Award - 1995

FIE
                                                                Foundation's Award - 1994

National
                                                                Aeronautical Award - 1994

Prof. Satish Dhawan (1972-1984)Home/About/Former
                                    chairman/Prof. Satish Dhawan

Prof. Satish Dhawanwas an Indian rocket scientist who
                                                was born in Srinagar,
                                                India and educated in India and the United States.

He is considered by
                                                the Indian scientific
                                                community to be the father of experimental fluid dynamics research in
                                                India and one of the most
                                                eminent researchers in the field of turbulence and boundary layers.He succeeded Vikram Sarabhai, the founder of the Indian space programme,
                                                as Chairman of the
                                                Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) in 1972. He was also the
                                                Chairman of the Space
                                                Commission and Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of
                                                Space. In the decade
                                                following his appointment he directed the Indian space programme through
                                                a period of
                                                extraordinary growth and spectacular achievement.Even while he was the head of the Indian space programme, he devoted
                                                substantial efforts towards
                                                boundary layer research. His most important contributions are presented
                                                in the seminal book
                                                Boundary Layer Theory by Hermann Schlichting.He was a popular professor at the Indian Institute of Science, (IISc)
                                                located in Bangalore.

He
                                                is credited for setting up the first supersonic wind tunnel in India at
                                                IISc. He also pioneered
                                                research on relaminarization of separated boundary layer flows,
                                                three-dimensional boundary
                                                layers and trisonic flows.Prof. SatishDhawan carried out pioneering experiments in rural
                                                education, remote sensing and
                                                satellite communications. His efforts led to operational systems like
                                                INSAT- a
                                                telecommunications satellite, IRS - the Indian Remote Sensing satellite
                                                and the Polar Satellite
                                                Launch Vehicle (PSLV) that placed India in the league of space faring
                                                nations.Following his death in 2002, the Indian satellite launch centre at
                                                Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh,
                                                located about 100 km north of Chennai in South India was renamed as the
                                                Prof.

SatishDhawan Space
                                                Centre. University
                                                                    of the Punjab in Lahore
                                                                    (undivided India at that time and now in Pakistan)

BA in
                                                                    Mathematics and Physics,

MA in
                                                                    English Literature

BE in
                                                                    Mechanical Engineering, 1945

University
                                                                    of Minnesota, Minneapolis

MS in Aeronautical
                                                                    Engineering,1947

California Institute of Technology,

Aeronautical
                                                                    Engineer's Degree, 1949

PhD in
                                                                    Aeronautics and
                                                                    Mathematics,1951, (with Prof Hans W. Liepmann as his
                                                                    advisor)

25
                                                                    September 1920(1920-09-25) Srinagar, India

Padma Vibhushan,

Indira Gandhi Award

Mechanical
                                                                    and Aerospace Engineering. Indian
                                                                    Space Research
                                                                    Organisation

Indian
                                                                    Institute of
                                                                    Science

California
                                                                    Institute of Technology

National
                                                                    Aerospace laboratories

Indian
                                                                    Academy of Sciences and
                                                                    Indian Space Commission

Dr.Hans
                                                                    W.

Liepmann. Indian
                                                                    space program. Indian Institute of Science,
                                                                        Bangalore,India

Senior
                                                                    Scientific Officer,
                                                                    1951. Professor
                                                                    and Head of the
                                                                    Department of Aeronautical
                                                                    Engineering,1955.

Director,1962-1981

California Insititute of
                                                                        Technology, USA

Visiting
                                                                    Professor,1971-72

National Aerospace Laboratories,
                                                                        Bangalore, India

Chairman,Research
                                                                    Council,
                                                                    1984-93

Indian Academy of Sciences

President,
                                                                    1977-1979

Indian Space Research Organisation

Chairman,
                                                                    1972-1984. Indian Space Commission

Chairman,
                                                                    1972-1984

Prof. M G K Menon (Jan-Sept 1972)Home/About/Former
                                    chairman/Prof. M G K Menon

Prof.

M G K Menon• Prof. M G K Menon (28 August
                                                1928 - 22 November 2016), was an Advisor in the Department of Space/
                                                Indian Space Research Organization (ISRO).• He was the President of Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta
                                                (1990- 2016).• Prof. Menon took his Ph.D. from the University of Bristol, UK in
                                                1953, He has a large number of honorary doctorates from universities in
                                                India and abroad• Prof. Menon was Fellow of all the three Science Academies in
                                                India; and was President of each one of them.• Prof.

Menon has done Scientific Work in Cosmic Rays, Particle
                                                Physics.• Distinguished for investigations in the field of cosmic ray
                                                studies and in particular on the high-energy inter-actions of elementary
                                                particles. Bachelor of
                                                                    Sciences from Jaswant
                                                                    College, Jodhpur, India 1946

28 August
                                                                    1928, Mangalore, Karnataka, India

Padma
                                                                    Shri in 1961

Fellow
                                                                    of all the three
                                                                    Science Academies in India

President
                                                                    of all the
                                                                    three Science Academies in India

Scientific
                                                                    Work in Cosmic
                                                                    Rays, Particle Physics. Padma
                                                                    Shri 1961

Padma
                                                                    Bhushan 1968

Padma
                                                                    Vibhushan 1985

Bhatnagar
                                                                    Award 1960

ISCA
                                                                    Chat-teriee Award 1984

Om
                                                                    PrakashBhasin Award 1985

Modi
                                                                    Award for Science 1994

Abdus
                                                                    Salem Medal 1996

D.Sc (Hons. Causa) from the
                                                                    Universities of Univs. of Delhi, Allahabad, Roorkee,
                                                                    BHU, Utkal, Aligarh
                                                                    Muslim, North Bengal, IIT Madras and Kharagpur

Univs. of
                                                                    Delhi, Allahabad, Roorkee, BHU, Utkal, Aligarh
                                                                    Muslim, North Bengal, IIT Madras and Karagpurh

Dr.

Vikram Ambalal Sarabhai (1963-1971)Home/About/Former chairman/Dr. Vikram Ambalal Sarabhai

Dr.Sarabhaiis considered as the Father of the Indian
                                                space program; He was a
                                                great institution builder and established or helped to establish a large
                                                number of institutions
                                                in diverse fields. He was instrumental in establishing the Physical
                                                Research Laboratory (PRL) in
                                                Ahmedabad : after returning from Cambridge to an independent India in
                                                1947, he persuaded
                                                charitable trusts controlled by his family and friends to endow a
                                                research institution near home
                                                in Ahmedabad. Thus, Vikram Sarabhai founded the Physical Research
                                                Laboratory (PRL) in Ahmedabad
                                                on November 11, 1947.

He was only 28 at that time. Sarabhai was a
                                                creator and cultivator of
                                                institutions and PRL was the first step in that direction. Vikram
                                                Sarabhai served of PRL from
                                                1966-1971.He was also Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission. He along with other Ahmedabad-based industrialists played a major role
                                                in the creation of the
                                                Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad.

Some of the most well-known institutions established by Dr. Vikram
                                                Sarabhai are:

Physical Research Laboratory
                                                (PRL), Ahmedabad

Indian
                                                Institute of Management
                                                (IIM), Ahmedabad

Community Science Centre,
                                                Ahmedabad

Darpan Academy for Performing
                                                Arts, Ahmedabad (along with his wife)

Vikram Sarabhai Space
                                                Centre, Thiruvananthapuramm

Space
                                                Applications Centre,
                                                Ahmedabad (This institution came into existence after merging six
                                                institutions/centres
                                                established by Vikram Sarabhai)

Faster Breeder Test Reactor
                                                (FBTR), Kalpakkam

Varaiable Energy Cyclotron
                                                Project, Calcutta

Electronics Corporation of
                                                India Limited (ECIL), Hyderabad

Uranium Corporation of India
                                                Limited (UCIL), Jaduguda, Bihar

Indian Space ProgramThe establishment of the Indian Space
                                                Research Organisation (ISRO) was one of his greatest achievements. He successfully convinced the government of the importance of a space
                                                programme for a developing
                                                country like India after the Russian Sputnik launch. Dr.

Vikram Sarabhai
                                                emphasized the importance of a
                                                space program in his quote:

"There are some who question the relevance of space
                                                activities in a developing
                                                nation. To us, there is no ambiguity of purpose. We do not have the
                                                fantasy of competing with
                                                the economically advanced nations in the exploration of the moon or the
                                                planets or manned
                                                space-flight.But we are convinced that if we are to play a meaningful
                                                role nationally, and in
                                                the community of nations, we must be second to none in the application
                                                of advanced technologies
                                                to the real problems of man and society."

Dr. Homi Jehangir Bhabha, widely regarded as the father
                                                of
                                                India's nuclear science
                                                program, supported Dr.

Sarabhai in setting up the first rocket launching
                                                station in India. This
                                                center was established at Thumba near Thiruvananthapuram on the coast of
                                                the Arabian Sea,
                                                primarily because of its proximity to the equator. After a remarkable
                                                effort in setting up the
                                                infrastructure, personnel, communication links, and launch pads, the
                                                inaugural flight was
                                                launched on November 21, 1963 with a sodium vapour payload.As a result of Dr Vikram A Sarabhai's dialogue with NASA in 1966, the
                                                Satellite Instructional Television
                                                Experiment (SITE) was launched during July 1975 - July 1976 (when
                                                Dr.Vikram Sarabhai was no more).Dr. Sarabhai started a project for the fabrication and launch of
                                                an Indian Satellite.

As a
                                                result, the first Indian satellite, Aryabhata, was put in orbit in 1975
                                                from a Russian
                                                Cosmodrome.Dr.Sarabhai was very interested in science education and founded
                                                a Community Science Centre at
                                                Ahmedabad in 1966. Today, the Centre is called the Vikram Sarabhai
                                                Community Science CentreDr.Vikram Sarabhai was born on 12 August 1919 in the city of Ahmedabad,
                                                Gujarat State in western India. The Sarabhai family was an important and
                                                rich Jain business family. His father Ambalal Sarabhai was an affluent
                                                industrialist and owned many mills in Gujarat.

Vikram Sarabhai was one
                                                of the eight children of Ambalal and Sarla Devi.Sarabhai matriculated from the Gujarat College in Ahmedabad after
                                                passing the Intermediate Science examination.After that he moved to England and joined the St. John's College,
                                                University of Cambridge. He received the Tripos in Natural Sciences from
                                                Cambridge in 1940.With the escalation of the Second World War, Sarabhai returned to India
                                                and joined the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore and began
                                                research in cosmic rays under the guidance of Sir C. V.

Raman, a Nobel
                                                Prize winner.He returned to Cambridge after the war in 1945 and was awarded a PhD
                                                degree in 1947 for his thesis titled Cosmic Ray investigation in
                                                Tropical Latitudes.Dr. Vikram Sarabhai died on 30 December 1971 at Kovalam,
                                                Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala. Shanti
                                                                SwarupBhatnagar Award
                                                                (1962)

Padma
                                                                Bhushan (1966)

Padma
                                                                Vibhushan, posthumous
                                                                (after-death) (1972)

President
                                                                of the Physics section,
                                                                Indian Science Congress (1962)

President
                                                                of the General
                                                                Conference of the I.A.E.A., Vienna (1970)

Vice-President,
                                                                Fourth U.N. Conference on 'Peaceful uses of Atomic Energy'
                                                                (1971)

The Vikram
                                                                    Sarabhai Space Centre,
                                                                    (VSSC), a research institute specialising in solid
                                                                    and liquid propellants
                                                                    for rockets located in Thiruvananthapuram
                                                                    (Trivandrum), capital of Kerala
                                                                    state, is named in his memory.

In 1974, the
                                                                    International Astronomical
                                                                    Union at Sydney decided that a Moon Crater BESSEL in
                                                                    the Sea of Serenity
                                                                    will be known as the Sarabhai Crater. Chairman ISRO, Secretary DOSHome/ About / Chairman ISRO, Secretary DOS



Dr. V. Narayanan, who is a Rocket & Spacecraft Propulsion Expert, joined ISRO in 1984 and functioned in various capacities.

During the initial phase, for 4½ years, he worked in the Solid Propulsion area of Sounding Rockets and Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) and Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) in Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC). He contributed to process planning, process control and realization of Ablative nozzle systems, Composite motor cases and Composite Igniter cases. In 1989, he completed his M.Tech in Cryogenic Engineering with First Rank at IIT-Kharagpur and joined the Cryogenic Propulsion area in Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC). ISRO's Geosynchronous launch vehicles, namely GSLV Mk-II & GSLV Mk-III, capable of placing 2-Tonne & 4-Tonne class Communication Satellites in Geo Transfer Orbit, have Cryogenic Propulsion Stages as terminal stages.

As one of the few Cryogenic members working in this area in the beginning, he carried out fundamental research, theoretical & experimental studies and contributed to the successful development and testing of Cryogenic subsystems, namely Gas Generator, Sub-scale Cryogenic engine of 1-tonne thrust and Thrust Chamber of 12-tonne thrust. Considering the long lead time required for the development of the Cryogenic stage of GSLV Mk-II vehicle, for meeting the initial flights, a few cryogenic stage hardware were procured from Russia. As an expert in Cryogenic propulsion, he contributed to the development of mission management systems, contract management and the successful flights of the GSLV Mk-II vehicle with procured cryogenic stages. For the sustained operation of GSLV Mk-II, initially, ISRO planned for technology acquisition of the Cryo Stage for manufacturing in India.

However, due to geopolitical reasons, the technology acquisition did not succeed and ISRO decided to develop CUS indigenously. Dr. V. Narayanan played a crucial role in the successful development of the Cryogenic Upper Stage (CUS) and contributed to making it operational for the GSLV Mk-II vehicle.

For the GSLV Mk-III Experimental mission with CARE module, he conceived and realized the Passive Cryogenic Stage and contributed to the successful experimental flight. As the Project Director of the C25 Cryogenic Project, he provided techno-managerial leadership, conceived, designed and developed the 25-tonne Cryogenic Propulsion System of the GSLV Mk-III Launch Vehicle powered by an engine developing a thrust of 200kN. He contributed to establishing the necessary infrastructure and facilities for design, analysis, realization, testing and launching. Due to his innovative approach, the C25 Cryo Stage was developed under his guidance in the shortest time frame with all successful tests and was inducted into the GSLV Mk-III vehicle.

Subsequently, he also made the stage operational. His contribution made India one among six countries in the world to have complex and high-performance cryogenic propulsion systems, achieving self-reliance in this area. Parallelly, he completed his Ph.D. in Aerospace Engineering from IIT-Kharagpur in 2001. The work carried out as part of his M.Tech thesis titled "Cavitating Venturies for Flow Control in Cryogenic Rocket Engines" and Ph.D. thesis titled "Thrust and Mixture Ratio Regulation Systems for Cryogenic Rocket Engines" were directly employed in the development of Indian Cryogenic Propulsion Systems.

For the GSLV Mk-III M1/Chandrayaan-2 Mission, the L110 Liquid Core Stage and C25 Cryogenic Stage were delivered for the vehicle. Propulsion systems for the Orbiter and Vikram lander, which include the throttleable thrusters for soft landing, were also developed and delivered for the Chandrayaan-2 Mission under his guidance. As the Chairman of the National Expert Committee constituted to study the reasons for the hard landing of the Chandrayaan-2 lander, he contributed to pinpointing the reasons and corrective actions required to overcome the observations. He realised and delivered all the Propulsion Systems for Chandrayaan-3.

For the Indian Human Space Flight (Gaganyaan) programme, he worked on the Human Rating of C25 and L110 liquid stages of the LVM3 vehicle and successfully delivered the stages for maiden Gaganyaan mission. The development of Propulsion modules for the Crew module & Service module and the Cabin pressure control systems, Thermal & humidity control systems are completed. The propulsion stage for the Test Vehicle was successfully developed and demonstrated in TVD1 mission. To enhance the GTO payload capability of the LVM3 vehicle and meet future Indian Heavy Lift Rockets' requirements, he guided the team and designed a LOX-Kerosene Semi-Cryogenic Propulsion System and provided techno-managerial leadership for its development.

He also took up the development of improving the C25 Cryogenic stage performance with higher propellant (32 tonnes of LOX & LH2) loading with a higher thrust (22-tonne) engine and successfully completed the project. His team is also developing a 1100kN thrust LOX-CH4 Engine and 300mN and lower power Electric Propulsion thrusters. He has also made significant contributions in the Spacecraft Propulsion area. He contributed as a Member of two Failure Analysis Committees (FACs) of GSLV Mk-II D3 and GSLV Mk-II F02 vehicles and as Member Secretary of the First Indian Cryogenic Upper Stage Engine FAC.

Dr. Narayanan was a member of ISRO's 12th Five-Year Plan Drafting Group and contributed to finalizing the propulsion system development during the 12th FYP. He also finalized the Propulsion Road Map of ISRO for the next 20 years (2017–2037). As Director of LPSC, during the last 7 years, he has delivered 226 liquid propulsion systems for launch vehicle and spacecraft missions.

He also contributed in pursuing R&D activities and infrastructure development in Liquid Propulsion area. Dr. V Narayanan, was also the Chairman of LPSC-IPRC Co-ordination Committee and Chairman of Programme Management Council - Space Transportation Systems. Dr.

Narayanan is an Alumni of Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur and has taken his M.Tech. with First Rank in Cryogenic Engineering in the year 1989 and Ph.D in Aerospace Engineering in the year 2001. He is a recipient of Silver Medal from IIT Kharagpur for First Rank in M.Tech, Gold Medal from Astronautical Society of India (ASI), ASI Award for Rocket and Related Technologies, Team Award from High Energy Materials Society of India, Outstanding achievement & Performance Excellence Awards and Team Excellence Awards of ISRO. He is also awarded Honorary Degree of Doctor of Science (Honoris Causa) from Sathyabama University, Chennai. He has been awarded with the Distinguished Alumnus Award-2018 by IIT, Kharagpur, National Design Award-2019 from National Design & Research Forum of Institution of Engineers (India) and National Aeronautical Prize-2019 from Aeronautical Society of India (AeSI).

Dr. Narayanan is a Member of International Academy of Astronautics (IAA), Fellow of Indian National Academy of Engineering, Member of Space Propulsion Committee of International Astronautical Federation, National President of Indian Society of Systems for Science and Engineering (ISSE), Fellow of Institution of Engineers (India), Fellow of Indian Cryogenic Council, Fellow of Aeronautical Society of India, Served as member of INAE Governing Council and Member in various National and International Professional Bodies. He is also serving as a Member of Governing Council and Board of Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) and Academic Council Member of some of the Engineering Colleges. Dr.

Narayanan has published many technical papers (Internal Reports: 1200, Journal/conference papers: 50 and Book chapters: 3). Delivered a large number of keynote speeches and ten convocation addresses in Engineering institutions including IITs and NITs. Space CommissionHome/About / Space Commission



Chairman



Member



Member



Member



Member



Member



Member



Member



Member



Member



Member



Member (Finance)



Member



Member Secretary

Who's whoHome/About/Who's who

Secretary, Department of SpaceChairman, ISROChairman, Space Commission

Dr. V.

NarayananEmail :chairmanoffice[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

Additional Secretary, Department of SpacePublic Grievances Officer & Chief Vigilance Officer

Smt. Sandhya Venugopala Sharma IASAntariksh Bhavan, New BEL Road ,Bengaluru-560 094Phone :+91 80 23416393 / 22172303Fax:+91 80 23511829Email :jsoffice[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

Nodal Officer with reference to Ministry of Law & JusticeDO Letter No.
                                  358763/LS/2020 dated 22.06.2020 for ensuring prompt action in dealing with Court Cases
                                  and safeguarding the interest of Union of India

Dr. Gautami SudarshanDeputy Secretary, Vigilance and Legal, Department of SpaceAntariksh Bhavan, New BEL RoadBengaluru-560 094Phone:+91 80-22172232Email:ds_legal[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

Nodal Officer to extend assistance to the family members of the deceased
                                  employee/Death
                                  of employee/Pensioner of DOS/ISROHQ, Bengaluru and facilitate expenditious
                                  disbursement
                                  of entitlements. Shri Suresh SSenior Head, Personnel & General AdministrationDepartment of Space, ISROHQAntariksh Bhavan, New BEL RoadBengaluru-560 094Phone:91 80 22172263 / 080 23416265Email:sureshs[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

Contact UsHome/About/Contact Us

For ISRO Centralised Recruitment Board (ICRB) queries

Phone:+91 80 22172465

                              / 22172264 / 22172260Email:icrb[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

For Public Relations Queries

Director ,Capacity Building and Public Outreach (CBPO),ISRO Headquarters Antariksh Bhavan,New BEL Road

                              Bengaluru-560 094Phone :+91 80 22172119Email  :isropr[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

For Satellite Data Products

NRSC Data Centre [NDC] ,National Remote Sensing Centre ,Department

                              of SpaceGovernment of IndiaBalanagar, Hyderabad-500 037Phone:+9140 23878560 or 23884422Fax:+9140 23884424Email:sales[at]nrsc[dot]gov[dot]inWebsite:www[dot]nrsc[dot]gov[dot]in



Nodal Officer with reference to Ministry of 

                                  Law & Justice DO Letter No. 358763/LS/2020 dated 22.06.2020 for 

                                  ensuring prompt action in dealing with Court Cases and safeguarding 

                                  the interest of Union of India

Deputy Secretary, Vigilance and Legal ,

                                Department of SpaceAntariksh Bhavan New BEL RoadBengaluru-560 094Phone:+91 8022172232Email:ds_legal[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

Nodal Officer to extend assistance to the 

                                    family members of the deceased employee/Death of employee/Pensioner of DOS/ISROHQ, 

                                    Bengaluru and facilitate expenditious disbursement of entitlements.

Senior Head , Personnel &General

                                Administration, Department of SpaceISRO Headquarters, Antariksh BhavanNew BEL Road

                                Bengaluru-560 094Phone:+91 80 22172263 / 080 23416265Email:sureshk[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

Under the DOS, the Indian Institute of space technology IIST, the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS)  and few other centres offer academic courses for Indian students. Courses cover graduate, postgraduate and doctoral degrees. Details of academic courses conducted at various centres are provided below. Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS) at Dehradun

Visit IIRS for details.

Academic Collaboration

DA-IICT, Gandhinagar (https:// www.daiict.ac.in/), Anand Agriculture University (AAU), Anand (http://www.aau.in/anand-agricultural-university-anand), and Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), ISRO, Dehradun (https:// www.iirs.gov.in/) are jointly offering a two-year “M.Sc. program in Agriculture Analytics.” DA-IICT, AAU and IIRS are the premier universities/ Institutes in ICT, Agriculture, and Space Technology domain, respectively. This is a multidisciplinary program of agriculture and data analytics. The program is aimed at nurturing students, with insights and the know-how to take the sector into the future. The course will introduce students to concepts of data analytics, viz. descriptive, predictive and prescriptive, in agriculture and will empower the students to eliminate speculative farming and usher in the age of predictive agriculture.

For registration visit:https://www.daiict.ac.in/admissions#tab-2

Courses for International students

Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS) is a premier institute with the primary aim to build capacity in Remote Sensing and Geo-informatics and their applications through education and training programmes at Post Graduate level. The Institute also hosts and provides support to the Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and The Pacific (CSSTE-AP), affiliated to the United Nations, to conduct Remote Sensing & GIS training and education programmes at Post Graduate level. The training and education programmes of the Institute are designed to meet the requirements of various target/user groups, i.e., for professionals at working, middle and supervisory levels, fresh graduates, researchers, academia and decision makers. The duration of courses ranges from one-week to two-years.

Visithttps://www.iirs.gov.in/cssteapandhttps://www.cssteap.org/for details. Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST), Thiruvananthapuram

IIST, Asia’s first Space University, was established at Thiruvananthapuram in 2007 with the objective of offering high quality education in space science and technology to meet the demands of Indian Space Programme. The institute offers undergraduate, postgraduate, doctoral and post-doctoral programmes in broad areas of space science, technology and applications. Visithttps://iist.ac.in/academics/curriculafor more details

Indian Space Research Programme (ISRO) encourages / supports, national/ international conferences focussed on the space activities or connected to the ISRO’s missions/ programmes/ objectives, which are conducted by recognised universities/ Institutions/ Agencies /Industry on the themes of mutual interest.

ISRO shall consider financial assistance subject to following conditions:

Rules for Conference Grant:

Forms

Following pages guide the visitor to various fellowship (JRF, SRF, PDF or research associate) offered by various Centres, units or autonomous bodies in DOS. Physical Research Laboratory (PRL) invites applications forJunior Research Fellowships(JRFs) from highly motivated and dynamic candidates to pursue research in the science domains of Astronomy & Astrophysics, Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics, Geosciences and Theoretical Physics. JRFs at PRL will be encouraged to register for a Ph.D. degree at an Institute/University with which PRL has an MoU. PRL also offersPost-Doctoral Fellowship(PDF) in research areas of the Laboratory is offered for a maximum period of two years.

The extension to 2nd year is subject to the satisfactory annual progress review. Candidates who have submitted their Ph.D. thesis or those who are about to submit their Ph.D. thesis can apply. Space Physics Laboratory (SPL) has a broad spectrum of opportunities for doing front ranking research in the areas of Atmospheric, Space and Planetary Sciences. These opportunities are offered as followingfellowships.For the latest advertisement for JRF position,click here.The Research Associate Positions are always OPEN at SPL and the candidates can apply any time of the year.

In addition to the above, SPL hosts INSPIRE faculty and NPDF candidates to carry out their research activities. SPL has a visiting scientist (VS) program, which either operates through ADCOS VS program, or directly by SPL. Any enquiry for these positions can be directed to the Director SPL. Indian Institute of Space Technology (IIST) invites applications from highly motivated candidates forPost Doctoral FellowshipProgramme in various frontier research areas of Aerospace Engineering, Avionics, Chemistry and Physics.

National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL) offers Post Doctoral Fellow (PDF)/Research Associate (RA). Follow this link for details:NARLWork with NARL >> Vacancies

URSC offers fellowships that will be announced here. Space Applications Centre (SAC) invites applications for Research Fellowships, Research Associateships and Research Scientists 

                             for specific projects or Education/Research Schemes. The recipients of these Fellowships/ Associateships /Scientists are expected to conduct 

                             research work whole time under the Principal Investigator of the SAC/ISRO sponsored project.

In special cases of individual Research Fellows/Associates, 

                             the candidates could be governed by the conditions of Research work as specified by the projects/ programmes/ schemes for which the Fellowships have been offered by ISRO. The detailed information about various fellowship/Associateships are provided at SAC Vyom website clickhere.In addition to the above, SAC also hosts INSPIRE/CSIR JRF, DST Women Scientist, UGC NET JRF candidates from various universities/institutes to carry out their research activities at SAC. SAC also collaborate with various universities/institutes for doing research under different umbrella like SAMUDRA, NISAR, AVIRIS, SRISTHI, NavIC with respect to specific projects. Under this fund is also provided by SAC to carry out research work and recruiting JRF/SRF.

For the latest advertisement for Research Fellowships, Research Associateships and Research Scientists position,clickhere

In tune with changing times, ISRO needs to play a vibrant role in
                                    ensuring the disseminating the enriched knowledge in space domain. In
                                    this context, several NGOs/ educational institutions have come up with
                                    their own framework, wherein interested students are encouraged to
                                    register with them and learn about space science & technology. Many of
                                    these agencies have “modules”, consisting of books and lab-works,
                                    co-existing with the regular classroom curriculum. Besides, there are
                                    digital content creators and online educators, making use of social
                                    media and mobile applications, striving to make the classrooms virtual.

List of ISRO’s Registered Space Tutor

Space On WheelsHome/Programmes/Space On Wheels

More Details



SLV-3 is a four stage rocket launched during 1979-1983 by ISRO. SLV uses
                      solid propellant for all four stages during its flight time. The first two stages use PBAN
                      (Polybutadiene acrylonitrile), and the last two stages HEF-20, are used. To study flight performance, the first SLV-3 carried an experimental payload
                      named ‘Rohini Technology Payload (RTP)’ launched on August 10, 1979.

The launch failed because of
                      the failure of the second stage control system, and it was unable to reach orbit. As people learn and grow from their mistakes, the next SLV-3 program
                      successfully put the RS-1(Rohini) Satellite in its intended orbit from Satish Dhawan Space Centre
                      (SDSC), Sriharikota, on July 18, 1980. RS-1 is the first Indian satellite made and launched based
                      on Indian technology. With this success, India became the 6th nation to join the list of Space
                      faring nations

ASLV is an acronym for Augmented Satellite Launching Vehicle.

ASLV was
                            the intermediate step before achieving indigenous launcher capability for heavier
                            communication and remote sensing satellites. ASLV differs from SLV with its payload capacity
                            of 150 kgs, which helps carry a lot more sensors to carry onboard. To achieve this higher
                            payload, ASLV has five stages, whereas SLV has four stages. Similar to SLV, ASLV also uses
                            solid propellant in all its stages.

ASLV has two straps on boosters in the first stage,
                            which helps deliver heavy payloads. ASLV is designed for closed-loop guidance, unlike
                            open-loop guidance of SLV, which facilitates injecting the satellite in the precise orbit. ASLV served between the period 1987 to 1994. During this period, ISRO
                            launched four missions to deliver satellites to LEO.

Out of four, only two were successful. Though ASLV usage in the Indian space history is less, it paved a new path for space
                            engineers to explore new technologies such as vertical integration, closed-loop guidance,
                            strap-on technology, inertial navigation, and bulbous heat shield. These new ones helped us
                            reduce the distance between India and outer space. ASLV was designed based on SLV, but the idea was to explore the
                            Geostationary orbit.

ASLV’s payload is called SROSS(Stretched Rohini Satellite Series). ASLV
                            carried SROSS-1, SROSS-2, SROSS-C, SROSS-C2 in 1987, 1988, 1992, 1994, respectively. SROSS-1
                            and SROSS-2 did not reach the needed orbit. Those two were the failure missions of ASLV.

SROSS-1 carried Launch Vehicle Monitoring Platform(LVMP), Gamma-Ray
                            Burst(GRB) payload, and Corner Cube Retro Reflector(CCRR) for laser tracking. SROSS-2
                            carried GRB, Mono payload Occular Electro-Optic Stereo Scanner(MEOSS). SROSS-3 carried GRB,
                            Retarding Potential Analyser(RPA). The Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV), also known as the workhorse
                            of ISRO, was initially designed to achieve satellite to Sun Synchronous Orbit (SSO) / LEOs.

As the years progressed, there were many developments that enhanced the payload capacity of
                            PSLV from 1000 kg to 1900 kg and widened the capability of transferring satellites to
                            multiple missions like LEO, SSO, Sub-GTO, and GTO. PSLV was developed based on the experience of ASLV. A liquid-propellant
                            engine propels the second and fourth stages of PSLV. The engine used in the 2nd stage of
                            PSLV is known as the VIKAS engine developed in collaboration with France.

The 4th stage of
                            PSLV uses a twin pressure fed engine known as PS4. Strap on boosters, the first and third stage uses HTPB based solid
                            propellant. The second stage uses N2O4/Unsymmetrical Dimethyl Hydrazine(UH25) combination. The last stage uses the Monomethyl Hydrazine(MMH)/Mixed Oxides of Nitrogen(MON) combination.

Payload fairing of PSLV uses multi-payload adopters, which helps
                            successfully place more than one satellite into the required orbits. The sole purpose of the
                            first stage and boosters is to provide lift-off using high thrust. Other stages are used to
                            make required attitudinal corrections using thrust vectoring techniques to successfully
                            inject satellites into the desired orbit. The final stage of PSLV is used to make changes
                            needed in the flight path to inject satellites into the correct orbits
                            .

PSLV carried popular missions like



GSLV (Geosynchronous Satellite Launching Vehicle) is a three-stage
                            launch vehicle. Most of the components like the Vikas engine, booster motors used in GSLV
                            were from PSLV technology. Three staged GSLV with four boosters was developed to send
                            satellites to Geosynchronous Transfer Orbits (GTO) and Low Earth Orbit (LEO), which PSLV
                            could not. The part of GSLV which makes it unique from other launch vehicles is
                            the final stage; it uses a cryogenic stage which was very new to ISRO.

For the GSLV MK-I
                            version, the cryo stage was imported from Russia. After developing the Indian-made cryogenic
                            engine CE-7.5, the GSLV series was named GSLV MK-II. Parallelly ISRO put efforts for
                            developing indigenous Cryo Upper stage (CUSP) and qualified C12.5 stage and inducted into
                            GSLV Mk II programme. The boosters used on GSLV are liquid-powered, popularly known as L-40
                            use N2O4 and UH25 propellant combination, which is hypergolic.

The first stage uses HTPB
                            solid propellant, and the second stage uses UH25 and N2O4 combination as in PSLV. As
                            discussed earlier, the third stage uses cryogenic propellants of combination liquid
                            oxygen(LOX) and liquid hydrogen(LH2). Some changes were made in the second stage-Vikas
                            engine to increase its performance in the launches made after 2018. The first launch of GSLV was on April 18, 2001, and the last GSLV
                            launch happened on August 12, 2021.

Fourteen launches were made during this period,
                            including MK-I and MK-II series. Out of them, eight were successful, two were partially
                            successful, and four were failures. From 2014, GSLV marked six continuous successful
                            launches.

                            . GSLV MK-III is the fourth generation launch vehicle for lifting 4000 kg
                            payloads.

Unlike other GSLV versions, MK-III uses only two boosters with solid propellant. GSLV Mk III has many unique features. Boosters are considered the first
                            stage that uses 200-ton HTPB based solid propellants on each. In contrast, the second stage
                            is powered with two Vikas engines and uses a 110-ton hypergolic propellant combination
                            UH25+N2O4.

The uppermost last stage uses an upgraded C20 cryogenic engine that works with
                            the Hydrolox combination(LOX+LH2). As we see the power produced by each stage in MK-III, anyone can agree
                            that its power is another level. GSLV MK-III can launch ten-ton category satellites to LEO
                            and four-ton category satellites to GTO. Moreover, GSLV MK-III will be the first human-rated
                            launch vehicle developed by the ISRO for the Gaganyaan mission.

Subsequent flights of MK-III were used to launch GSAT-19, GSAT-29 and Chandrayaan-II. Chandrayaan-II is the heaviest spacecraft ISRO has launched as of now. Moreover, GSLV MK-III
                            was successful in all of its four missions. The first Indian designed and built human space flight launch mission,
                            ‘Gaganyaan’, is also planned to go on GSLV MK-III.

Necessary changes are under process to
                            make human flight missions successful. As it is a human flight, there are limitations in
                            flight acceleration. For safe re-entry, required developments and changes related to
                            propellant and engine design, components strength and integrity, avionics, and standby
                            systems have been in progress. ISRO carried out a major technology demonstration today (July 05,
                            2018), the first in a series of tests to qualify a Crew Escape System, which is a critical
                            technology relevant for human spaceflight.

The Crew Escape System is an emergency escape
                            measure designed to quickly pull the crew module along with the astronauts to a safe
                            distance from the launch vehicle in the event of a launch abort. The first test (Pad Abort
                            Test) demonstrated the safe recovery of the crew module in case of any exigency at the
                            launch pad. After a smooth countdown of 5 hours, the Crew Escape System along with
                            the simulated crew module with a mass of 12.6 tonnes, lifted off at 07.00 AM (IST) at the
                            opening of the launch window from its pad at Satish Dhawan Space Centre, Sriharikota today. The test was over in 259 seconds, during which the Crew Escape System along with crew module
                            soared skyward, then arced out over the Bay of Bengal and floated back to Earth under its
                            parachutes about 2.9 km from Sriharikota.
                            .

The crew module reached an altitude of nearly 2.7 km under the power of
                            its seven specifically designed quick acting solid motors to take away the crew module to a
                            safe distance without exceeding the safe g-levels. Nearly 300 sensors recorded various
                            mission performance parameters during the test flight. Three recovery boats are being
                            exercised to retrieve the module as part of the recovery protocol. Reusable Launch Vehicle Technology Demonstrator (RLV-TD) is the most
                            complex program ISRO has gone through.

RLV-TD is a fusion of aircraft and rocket technology. It needs to maintain integrity between both systems and make the mission successful. It uses
                            the scramjet engine to achieve supersonic and hypersonic flight. Autonomous navigation
                            guidance and control system, integrated flight management system, heat shielding, Elevon
                            controlled flight, and everything regarding RLV-TD is complex.

Through experiments, minor
                            upgrades and changes are made in a design that will make the RLV-TD mission successful. For the design, simulation, and prototype experimentation of RLV-TD,
                            ISRO collaborated with India’s top Research & Development organisations such as the National
                            Aeronautics Laboratory(NAL) and the Indian Institute of Science(IISc). ISRO planned four
                            different phases for RLV-TD tests, namely Hypersonic Flight Experiment(HEX), Landing
                            Experiment(LEX), Return Flight Experiment(REX), and Scramjet Propulsion Experiment(SPEX).

                            . Currently, ISRO completed HEX on May 23, 2016, and the mission was
                            successful in maiden itself.

As part of the HEX-1 mission program, the first stage rocket
                            HS9 propelled the RLV-TD to a height of 56Km in 91.1 sec burn time. After burnout, HS9
                            booster and RLV-TD travelled in the combined phase till 111 sec. The booster was separated
                            from RLV-TD using pyrotechnics and followed a different path to avoid a mid-air collision. A standard heat shield/payload fairing is typically a cone-cylinder
                            combination structure( due to aerodynamic considerations ) enclosing the space
                            craft/satellite, generally the top most structure in launch vehicle.

It is used to protect a
                            spacecraft payload against the impact of dynamic pressure and aerodynamic heating during
                            launch through atmosphere

It is made in two halves, which is integrated at the end of launch
                            vehicle assembly It is made of light weight materials like aluminum alloys or composites It
                            experiences a lot of bending loads hence it is a stiffness based design

It is painted with a thermal protection paints as a lot of heat is
                            generated during the ascent phase in atmosphere
                            once the launch vehicle crosses the atmospheric regime, the heat shield is separated and
                            jettisoned
                            The shape of the heat shield is finalized based on the different dynamic loads , flow
                            separation, vehicle trajectory, Mach nos encountered, available TPS etc. The inside of the heat shield designed and has various mechanisms to
                            control aero acoustic loads which can damage the satellite during ascent (Acoustics and
                            vibration)

DIORAMAS

RADAR is an acronym for Radio Detection And Ranging. Radar requires
                          antennas at both transmitting and receiving ends. Antenna is a part of the radar and is the
                          physical interface of any electronic device to the electromagnetic waves.

Antennas track satellites and information from satellites comes in the
                          form of an analog signals – these radio wave of a specific frequencies will be captured in the
                          dish antenna and then feeds into the sub-reflector, where that energy from that signal becomes
                          focused and finally proceeds into the receiver. The information then feeds to a computer which
                          will be processed into binary code. Ultimately this data will be codified into use ful
                          information. These Antennas can be manoeuvred on the horizontal and vertical planes in the
                          direction of satellites.

While rotating the cables are connected through slip rings so that
                          entanglement of cables are avoided. Indian Deep Space Network (IDSN)is a network of large
                          antennas and communication facilities operated by the Indian Space Research Organisation to
                          support the interplanetary spacecraft missions of India. Its hub is located at Byalalu,
                          Ramanagar in the state of Karnataka in India in 2008. The main antenna is a 32-meter Deep Space Antenna.

The wheel and track 32
                          m antenna is a state-of-the-art system that supported the Chandrayaan-1 mission operations. It
                          is currently supporting Mars Orbiter Mission[3]This is co-located with 18 m
                          antenna in the IDSN site at Byalalu. Main Parts:



Chandrayaan-1, India's first mission to Moon, was launched successfully
                          on October 22, 2008 from SDSC SHAR, Sriharikota. The spacecraft was orbiting around the Moon
                          at a height of 100 km from the lunar surface for chemical, mineralogical and photo-geologic
                          mapping of the Moon.

The spacecraft carried 11 scientific instruments built in India, USA, UK,
                          Germany, Sweden and Bulgaria. After the successful completion of all the major mission objectives, the
                          orbit has been raised to 200 km during May 2009. The satellite made more than 3400 orbits
                          around the moon and the mission was concluded when the communication with the spacecraft was
                          lost on August 29, 2009. The most significant result from Chandrayaan-1 is the discovery of the presence of hydroxyl
                          (OH) and water (H2O) molecules on the lunar surface.
                          validation of Lunar Magma Ocean hypothesis, detection of reflection of 20% of solar wind
                          protons, detection of presence of Mg, Al, Si, Ca on the lunar surface and three dimensional
                          conceptualization of many lunar craters of interest are other scientific results from
                          Chandrayaan-1.

Chandrayaan-2 mission is a highly complex mission, and comprised an
                          Orbiter, Lander and Rover to explore the unexplored South Pole of the Moon. The mission is
                          designed to expand the lunar scientific knowledge through detailed study of to pography,
                          seismography, mineral identification and distribution, surface chemical composition,
                          thermo-physical characteristics of top soil and composition of the tenuous lunar atmosphere,
                          leading to a new understanding of the origin and evolution of the Moon. ACHIEVEMENTS



This is the latest Launch Pad commissioned during 2000-2001 for next
                          generation launch vehicles like GSLV Mk III etc. The launch pad was built on ITL concept. i.e.

Integrate - Transfer-
                          Launch. The rocket (launch Vehicle) will be assemble vertically and the assembled launch
                          vehicle will be towed from Assembly Building to Launch Pad on a Mobile Launch Pedestal (MLP). A self propelled bogie will lift the MLP along with launch vehicle which will combinedly
                          weight 15,00,000 kgs and travel for around one km on a twin track. The launch vehicle then positioned infront of a umbilical tower.

The
                          tower has got 3 sets of swing cum vertically re-positionable platforms used for servicing the
                          launch vehicle during the last phase of campaign. The launch vehicle will be serviced for 7-10
                          days at the launch pad before lifting off. Several checks and fuel filling will be carried out
                          during this final phase. The satellite cooling and telemetry checks are very important for
                          monitoring the satellite health.

In case of GSLV, a cryo arm extended from the Umbilical tower
                          will be used for filling and draining the cryo propellants. There are three lighting protection towers around the launch pad, which
                          protects the launch vehicle from lighting and discharge. Built in the year 1990 exclusively for launching PSLVs and later upgraded
                          to service GSLV Mk 2 vehicles. Built on IOP - Integrate on Pad concept.

The pedestal on which the launch
                          vehicle is assembled, is static. Where as the assembly building moves back and forth on a rail
                          track, which will encapsulates the launch vehicle for servicing. The Mobile Service Tower (MST) which is 76m tall structural building. It
                          is equipped with foldable and vertically repositionable access platforms facilitates the
                          vertical integration of the launch vehicle.

It is operated using heavy electrical motors. The spacecraft, which is checked thoroughly and fuelled at its
                          preparation facilities arrives at the launch pad and gets integrated with the launch vehicle
                          in a clean room, set up inside MST. A few hours before the launch, the MST, which weighs about 3200 tons
                          moves slowly to its parking place on 32 wheels along the twin rail track leaving the launch
                          vehicle on the launch pedestal. Remote sensing technology is used in a vast range of applications with a
                          lot of different applications, as well as most earth sciences, like meteorology, geology,
                          hydrology, ecology, earth science, geography, and land measuring, having high importance in
                          the applications of military, intelligence, commercial, economic, planning, and humanitarian
                          efforts.

The evolution of National Natural Resources management system paved way
                          to IRS / Indian Remote Sensing Programme. The first IRS satellite dedicated to Remote sensing applications was
                          launched, on March 17, 1988 from Soviet casmodrome Baikanur.The programme continued with a
                          series of satellites Resoursesat, RISat, Oceansat, Cartosat etc. for various focussed
                          missions.Remote sensing is the science of making inferences about objects from measurements
                          made at a distance, without coming into physical contact with the objects under study. More Details

ISRO has influenced educational institutions by its activities like making
                                    satellites for communication, remote sensing and astronomy. The launch of
                                    Chandrayaan-1 increased the interest of universities and institutions towards making
                                    experimental student satellites.

Capable Universities and institution can venture
                                    into space technology on-orbit with guidance and support from ISRO in following
                                    ways. Development of Payload (by Universities/Institutions)

Every satellite carries a payload that performs the intended function to achieve the
                                    mission goal and the main bus that supports the payload function. The Development of
                                    payloads may comprise of detectors, electronics and associated algorithms, which can
                                    be an experimental piggy back payload on the ISRO’s on-going (Small or operational)
                                    satellite projects. Design and development of detectors, payload electronics, and associated algorithm /
                                    experiments that enhance the application of space services to mankind is a
                                    continuing R&D activity in several educational institutions all over the world.

Educational institutions can propose the payloads developed by them to be flown on
                                    ISRO’s small satellites. Under this option, payload only is developed by the Universities or Institutions and
                                    launched with ISROs satellite missions which has other ISRO’s payloads. Data Handing
                                    and data transmission is done by ISRO as the part of satellite bus. After launch ISRO will acquire payload data and disseminate it to Universities/
                                    institutions further processing and analysis.

Satellite Design & Fabrication by Universities/Institutions

Under this option Universities have to design, fabricate, test the satellite Bus &
                                    Payload and deliver the integrated spacecraft for launch. Technical guidance in
                                    designing, fabrication and testing will be provided by ISRO. Some critical materials
                                    for the space mission also will be provided by ISRO. The designs and test results will be reviewed by ISRO team.

Under this option more than one University/Institution may participate. One among
                                    them will be the focal point for the ISRO. After launch, the collected data will be
                                    archived and disseminated by university/Institution(s). Contact for further information :

Programme Coordinator,Student Satellite Projects,U R Rao Satellite Centre / ISRO, BengaluruPh : 080-2508 4174 (D) / 4480 (O)email : stu_sats[at]ursc[dot]gov[dot]in

The technologies developed by DoS for Space Programme find their utility
                                                by industries for adaption for Space technology and other applications.

Information on Technology Transfer from DOS is consolidated by Capacity
                                                Building Programme Office.Hereis the Office’s
                                                page. Technologies transferred from URSC, ISRO are listedhere

Technology transfer is enabled through NSIL. Details arehere

Indian Space Research Organisation is organising a special programme for School Children called "Young Scientist Programme" "YUva VIgyani KAryakram”,YUVIKA, to impart basic knowledge on Space Technology, Space Science and Space Applications to the younger students in emerging trends in space science and technology amongst the youngsters, who are the future building blocks of our nation. ISRO has chalked out this programme to "Catch them young".

The programme is also expected to encourage more students to pursue in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) based research /career

First list of students selected for YUVIKA-2024PDF - 174 KB

Second list of students selected for YUVIKA-2024PDF - 548 KB

The selection criteria are mentioned athttps://jigyasa.iirs.gov.in/yuvika

May 28, 2023

ISRO-sponsored Young Scientists Programme YUVIKA-2023 got successfully concluded on May 26, 2023. It was a two-week residential programme for the high school students. Around 337 students from all 28 states and 8 union territories underwent the programme from May 15 - 26, 2023 at seven ISRO / DoS Centres viz. VSSC, Thiruvananthapuram, SAC, Ahmedabad, URSC, Bengaluru, SDSC-SHAR, Sriharikota, NRSC, Hyderabad, IIRS, Dehradun and NE-SAC Shillong.

The students were given exposure to space science, technology and applications through classroom lectures, hands-on activities such as model rocketry, sky gazing, robotic coding/experiments, CANSAT experiments, drone demonstrations, DIY kits assembly, facility visits and interaction with eminent scientists etc. Extracurricular activities like yoga & meditation, sports, cultural activities and local sight tours etc. were also organised as part of the residential programme. On the valedictory day, Shri S. Somanath, Chairman ISRO / Secretary DoS and Centre Directors of ISRO interacted with students and clarified many innovative and intuitive questions.

Chairman, ISRO urged the participants to become brand ambassadors of ISRO in their region to promote science education and become future pillars of scientific development in the country. National Database for Emergency Management(NDEM)is a national repository of multi-scale geospatial database coupled with decision support system tools. It is a unique and homogenous database served for entire country with essential database elements for addressing emergency/disaster management in the country.NRSC/ISRO established a state-of-art facility with structured framework with multi-institutional participation to assist the disaster managers of all States/UTs for preparedness, hazard/risk zonation, damage assessment, and emergency response under the behest of Ministry of Home Affairs(MHA), Government of India. NDEM services have been operationalised since 2013 providing timely information along with disaster specific products for effective decision making.

NDEM essentially serves as national repository of GIS based data for entire country coupled with set of Decision Support System tools to assist the disaster managers in decision making during emergency situations. NDEM can be approachedhere:



Academic Interface is one of the most important activities of CBPO and it aims at encouraging joint collaborative research with academia/Labs/institutes and establishing the Knowledge/incubation/research etc., across the country. Recognising the need for a broader academic interface with institutions across the country, a series of capacity building initiatives have been taken up to further strengthen the involvement of academia for ISRO programmes. These initiatives include R&D Projects (RESPOND Basket); Space Technology Cells (STCs); Regional Academic Centres for Space (RAC-S); Space Technology Incubation Centres (S-TICs).

Research proposals are supported by ISRO in the areas of Space Science, Space Technology and Space Applications which are of relevance to Space Programme. RESPOND Basket document published annually comprises of the most urgent and important research problems identified by ISRO/DOS Centre / Units on the basis of ISRO’s upcoming programmatic R&D requirements. And Research Area for Space Document published bi-annually with same moto. Each research problem comprises of a brief write-up about the topic for the faculty of the Academic Institutions/R&D laboratories to select and prepare the proposals.

A Co-PI from ISRO/DOS  Centres has also been identified for each topic proposed in the Basket. In March 2022, ISRO launched “I-GRASP” online portal (ISRO GRant in Aid for Space Research Programmes). The portal invites proposals from academia. The PIs from the academic institutions based on their area of interest and expertise select and submit the research proposals through this portal, where the entire process will be carried out through this portal which includes submission of proposals under RESPOND/STC/S-TIC/RACS and Other programmes are submitted online through I-GRASP portal only.

An individual or group(s) of scientists/faculty members affiliated to any academic institution/autonomous R&D institutions may submit proposals. The Principal Investigator(s) should be full-time employee(s) of the concerned institution. The age limit for the Principal Investigator should be below 65 years (sixty-five years) including the project period. The Head of the academic institution must forward proposals with application for research grants.

Proposals from individuals not affiliated to any recognized institution will not be considered. There may also be co-investigator(s) from the same/different institutions working on the project. But satisfactory completion of a project will be the responsibility of the Principal Investigator and her/his institution.

582

216

15

Indian Space Research Organisation HQ,

Department of Space,Government of India

Antariksh Bhavan,New BEL Road,

Bangalore 560094



E-mail : dir[dot]cbpo[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

Capacity Building & Public Outreach (CBPO)

Indian Space Research Organisation HQ,

Department of Space,Government of India,

Antariksh Bhavan,New BEL Road,

Bangalore 560094



E-mail : respond[at]isro[dot]gov[dot]in

Content on this website is managed and owned by Department of Space, Indian Space Research Organization,Government of India.Powered by Capacity Building and Public Outreach, CBPO,ISRO. Mar 18, 2023

This Atlas provides the details of landslide present in Landslide provinces of India including damage assessment of specific landslide locations.

Geospatial landslide inventory database consisting of ~80,000 landslides in India mapped by NRSC/ISRO under its DMS programme during the 1998-2022 period is reported here. The database covers landslide vulnerable regions in 17 states and 02 UTs of India in the Himalayas and Western Ghats. The database includes three types of landslide inventory - seasonal, event-based and route-wise for the 1998-2022 period. Seasonal inventory contains pan-India landslide database corresponding to the 2014 and 2017 rainy season in India.

Event-based inventory contains details of some of the major triggering events such as Kedarnath and Kerala disasters, and Sikkim earthquake as well as few large valley blocking landslides. Routewise inventory contains details of landslides along selected routes of tourist and pilgrimage importance.Satellite data of high to very high resolution such as IRS-1D PAN+LISS-III, Resourcesat-1, 2 and 2A LISS-IV Mx, Cartosat-1 and 2S, data from International satellites (Sentinel-1&2, Pleiades and WorldView) and Aerial images were used in the mapping of landslides. Some of the mapped landslides were validated in the field using mobile App and news reports. The database were used to rank 147 districts in 17 states and 02 UTs of India for their exposure to landslides in terms of key socio-economic parameters.

Lastly advanced techniques in landslide detection, modeling and prediction are also explained. Also read¦

Click here to download pdfPDF - 10.5 MB

National Information system for Climate and Environment Studies (NICES)envisages realization of national level climate database generation for climate studies (impact assessment). NICES is a muli-institutional effort with the participation of ISRO / DOS centres, other ministries/departments and other R&D institutions. The geophysical products, pertaining to land, ocean, atmosphere and cryosphere are disseminated through aNICESportal developed under Bhuvan platform.

Currently 28 of 51 ECVs are amenable from space, either directly or indirectly. For 13 geophysical parameters, the space-based inputs are being made available through NICES portal (Albedo, Cloud properties, Forest fire regime, Land cover, Ocean colour, Ozone, Soil moisture, Sea level pressure, Ocean Surface currents, Snow cover, River discharge (Runoff), Total Alkalinity and pCO2. The data could be downloaded by the researchers using the links given below. Mobile AppsHome/Resources/Mobile Apps



Following are the Apps developed by ISRO for public.

The app provides information about monthly and yearly Global Horizontal Irradiance, Direct Normal Irradiance and Diffused Horizontal Irradiance derived from INSAT data and other sources. It also provides other useful information such as Sun path, terrain shadow analysis, temperature profiles etc. Further, the app provides a tool for estimating optimal tilt angle of solar panels.Link to download:Click Here

This android application enables a user to collect data by defining his own attributes/fields. The location and time information is automatically collected from users' mobile phone.

The data is stored on VEDAS servers. A geospatial data visualization is available on VEDAS website (Click Here). The user may view the data along with provided reference layers and download as geojson or kml files. Link to download:Click Here

When fisherman in India go to sea in India, often they cross the International Maritime boundary during their fishing routines.

The app alerts the fishers against putting out to sea during adverse weather conditions and recall those who are still at sea or have gone beyond the international maritime boundary. MapmyIndiaNavIC Message Receiver App also aids fisherman convenience. The app works completely offline and showcases areas for potential fishing (tuna or normal). It also provides waypoint navigation from the fisher’s current position to the selected area of potential fishing.

Through INCOIS, the app also provides emergency messages for incoming adverse weather conditions – cyclones, tidal waves, high tide etc

Link to download: Google Play Store -> MapmyIndiaNavIC

Following are the Apps developed by DOS for public. Nabhmitra is a national MSS network implemented for real time tracking of the sub-20 m boats going into deep sea for fishing. It also supports two-way short messaging services wherein fishermen can send his distress or custom message to the User Agency through an Android application in his phone. The network also supports broadcasts of any weather alert or emergency warning in various modes, which can be received on the Fisherman app.

The App is connected to MSS satellite terminal and offer all services in conjunction with the Satellite Terminal. A variant of this App is also available for the Boat Owners to track their assets and communicate with their employee or boat pilots.As this App works in conjunction with the MSS terminal, it is distributed by the concerned Nodal agency on Terminal registration. Sagarmitra is an operational Satcom network developed for emergency messaging by fisherman for search and Rescue operation by indian Coast guard on manual activation. Sagarmitra app is an android app developed for fisherman which connects to the sitcom terminal through Bluetooth interface and provides user interface for sending and receiving emergency messages.

It allows them to send their emergencies in case of any distress and displays the acknowledgments to the emergencies received from central control station (hub).This network also supports broadcasts of any weather alert, PFZ or emergency warning in various modes, which can be received on the app. As this network is developed for a specific Nodal agency and the app works in conjunction with the Distress alert transmitter- Second Generation terminal, hence it is distributed by the agency on registration. Satsleeve is An S Band trans-receiver terminal meant for Two-way voice communication. It works in conjunction with an android phone.

An android app has been developed which provides userinterface and associated features of satellite phone to user. It allows user to establish any call by sending registration request to hub, initiate a Satcom call, connecting and disconnecting a call. This app works in conjunction with the Satsleeve terminal. Hence, the Service provider on registration distributes it.

Meteorological and Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre (MOSDAC)Home/Resources/ Meteorological and Oceanographic Satellite Data Archival Centre (MOSDAC)

The Indian Space Research Organisation recognises the need for exchange of meteorological and oceanographic satellite data and information services among the scientific community, researchers, academia and Industry. The meteorological and oceanographic data available onMOSDACis classified into following categories. Following types of users are defined:

Data Links:

Near Real time data:





PublicationsHome

Annual Report-English

Annual Report-Hindi

Brochures

NewsLetters

Special Publications

Space science

Disha Magazine

Space Books Series for Children

Atlas on Night Time Light of India

Atlas:Exploring Footprints of the Past Heritage Documentation – A Geospatial Approach

Publication (External)

Diverse Space Application for National Development

Innovation in Space Tech - Somanath S, Yojana, May 2023

Mann ki baat August 2023

Bhoonidhi Newsletter 2024

Inter-Centre Hindi Technical Seminar 2023

Aditya-L1 is the first space-based observatory-class Indian solar mission to study the Sun. The spacecraft is placed in a halo orbit around the Lagrangian point 1 (L1) of the Sun-Earth system, which is about 1.5 million km from the Earth.

A satellite placed in the halo orbit around the L1 point has the major advantage of continuously viewing the Sun without any occultation/eclipse. This provides a greater advantage of observing the solar activities continuously.Know more.. Aditya-L1 spacecraft is launched from Satish Dhavan Space Center (SDCS), Shriharikota onboard PSLV-C57 with PSLV-XL configuration. PSLV injected Aditya-L1 spacecraft in a highly eccentric Earth bound orbit.

Further, the spacecraft performed multiple orbital maneuvers to reach into a halo orbit around Sun-Earth Lagrange point L1 which is 1.5 million kilometers from Earth.Available here.. The spacecraft is carrying seven payloads to observe the photosphere, chromosphere, and the outermost layers of the Sun using electromagnetic and particle detectors. Using the special vantage point of L1, four payloads will directly view the Sun and the remaining three payloads will carry out in-situ studies of particles and ﬁelds at the Lagrange point L1.Know More.. Data acquired by all seven instruments of Aditya-L1 is available on PRADAN portal.

One may search, browse, preview and download the data for all the suitable purposeshere.. Science observations using some of the instruments onboard Aditya-L1 shall be driven via a proposal based system and shall be available to the community in near future. One may propose their observation configurationhere.. Regular outreach products from instruments onboard Aditya-L1 shall be available to the users in near future.

These products are to create curiosity among the users towards science research using Aditya-L1 data products. One may access the outreach portalhere.. Aditya-L1 Support Cell shall work with ISRO to maximize utilization of science data, develop tool and analysis software and conduct trainings for the community.Know More.. ISRO Aditya-L1



AstroSat is India’s first dedicated multi wavelength space observatory.

This scientific 

                satellite mission endeavours for a more detailed understanding of our universe. One of the unique features of 

                AstroSat mission is that it enables simultaneous multi-wavelength observations of various astronomical 

                objects with a single satellite. The main scientific objectives of AstroSat mission are:

The scientific payload on-board Astrosat are Ultra Violet Imaging 

                        Telescope (UVIT), Soft X-ray Telescope (SXT), Large Area X-ray Proportional Counter (LAXPC),

                        Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride Imager (CZTI) and Scanning Sky Monitor (SSM).Know more. AstroSat Proposal Processing System (APPS) is a web based proposal 

                        processing software for the Astrosat mission that facilitates the proposal driven operations 

                        and participation of the scientific community.

To submit a proposalClick here

This document assists the proposers with the AstroSat proposal preparation 

                        and submission using the APPS software, it also acts as the proposers’ manual for the APPS 

                        software.Download

The observations will be planned as per mission scheduling. The PI will be informed, after the completion of successful observation for the downloading 

                        of processed Level-1 data.Know More

The science data from observations made by the instruments on board the 

                        spacecraft are available for download after the proprietary period from this portal.Access here

A catalog of the sources detected by SSM and the light curve data file for 

                        every source detected can be obtained from this website.Access here

This is a web-based tool that proposers need to use in order to determine 

                        AstroSat visibility period for observations of a target of interest.Access here

Astrosat Schedule Viewer (ASV): To view the Astrosat obseravtion schedule 

                        infomationClick here

AstroSat brochure released during its launch containing about PSLV-C30, AstroSat, international customer satellites of PSLV –C30 and satellites of other countries launched by PSLV isavailable here

To access the Astrosat Proposal Redbook, that gives the details 

                        of sources observed and accepted/scheduled for AstroSat observations,Click here

Web based Portable Interactive Multi-Mission Simulator (WebPIMMS): 

                        to estimate the source count ratesClick here

AstroSat Handbook describes the technical details of the payloads 

                        on-board AstroSat.Access here

Download the Astrosat proposal Scientific justification templatehereand Technical justification templatehere. Image Gallery

AstroSat Updates

Chandrayaan-1, India's first mission to Moon, was launched successfully on October 22, 2008

                from Satish Dhawan Space Centre(SDSC) SHAR, Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh. The spacecraft orbited around the Moon 

                at an altitude of 100 km (200 km from May 2009 to Aug 2009) from the lunar surface for chemical, mineralogical and 

                photo-geologic mapping of the Moon.

The spacecraft carried 11 scientific instruments built in India, USA, UK, 

                Germany, Sweden and Bulgaria. The mission was  concluded when the communication with the Spacecraft was lost on  

                August 29, 2009.Know more. Scientific Payloads: Terrain Mapping Camera (TMC), Hyper Spectral Imager (HySI), 

                        Lunar Laser Ranging Instrument (LLRI), High Energy X - ray Spectrometer (HEX), Moon Impact Probe(MIP),Know More

The data acquired at various phases of the Chandrayaan-1 mission from TMC, 

                        HySI, M3, SARA and MiniSAR are processed as per the processing level definitions and provided in 

                        Planetary Data System (PDS) standards for archival and dissemination.Access here

Chandrayaan-1 brochure released during the launch, containing information about 

                        launch vehicle, flight profile, mission trajectory, satellite and instruments isAvailable here

Poster

Image Gallery

Chandrayaan-2

Mars Orbiter Mission (MOM), the maiden interplanetary mission of ISRO, launched on 

            November 5, 2013 by PSLV-C25 got inserted into Martian orbit on September 24, 2014 in its first attempt. The Mars Orbiter Mission carries 5 payloads to accomplish its objectives. 3 

                    electro-optical payloads operating in the visible and thermal infra-red spectral ranges, a 

                    photometer to sense the Mars atmosphere & surface and an exospheric neutral composition analyser.Know More

MOM data sets are engineered in Planetary Data System Standards 3 which is a 

                    defacto standard for planetary mission data sets.

To access the online archive with the latest 

                    publicly released dataclick here

MOM Brochure released during the launch, containing about the Mars, mission objectives,

                    mission plan, payloads, spacecraft, launch vehicle, ground segment and challenges, isavailable here

The spacecraft is injected into an Elliptic Parking Orbit by the launcher. With six main engine burns, the spacecraft is gradually maneuvered into a departure 

                    hyperbolic trajectory with which it escapes from the Earth’s Sphere of Influence (SOI) 

                    with Earth’s orbital velocity + V boost.Know More

The Scientifific Mars atlas, released on 24 Sep, 2015, provides glimpses of the various morphological 

                    features and atmospheric phenomenon occuring on Mars as captured by Mars Colour Camera (MCC) onboard  

                    Mars Orbiter Mission (MOM).Download

Payload Papers

Image Gallery

The Chandrayaan-2 mission was successfully launched on 22nd July 2019 at 14:43 hrs by GSLV MkIII-M1 from Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC), Sriharikota. After a series of Earth bound manoeuvres, the spacecraft entered into Lunar Transfer Trajectory (LTT) on August 14th. Lunar Orbit Insertion (LOI) manoeuvre was performed on August 20th, thereby Chandrayaan-2 was successfully inserted into the elliptical orbit around the Moon.

This was followed by a series of Lunar bound orbit maneuvers for reducing the orbit to circular polar orbit around the Moon.Know more

To develop and demonstrate the key technologies for   end-to-end lunar mission capability, including soft-landing and roving on the lunar surface. To expand the lunar scientific knowledge through detailed study of topography, mineralogy, surface chemical composition, thermo-physical characteristics and tenuous lunar atmosphere leading to a better understanding of

                the origin and evolution of the Moon. Chandrayaan-2's science payloads aim to perform detailed study of lunar topography, seismography, mineral identification & distribution, surface chemical composition, 

                        thermo-physical characteristics of top soil & composition of the tenuous lunar atmosphere.Know More

Chandrayaan-2 brochure comprising of information on why are we going to moon, it's flight sequence, 

                        GSLV-Mk-III, mission sequence, CH2 composite module, orbiter, lander, rover and mission payloads isAvailable here

The data acquired at various phases of the Chandrayaan-2 mission from CLASS, CHACE-2, XSM , IIRS, TMC-2, OHRC, DFRS and DFSAR are processed as per the processing level definitions and provided in 

                        Planetary Data System (PDS) standards for archival and dissemination.Access here

Documents and Posters

Payload Papers

Image Gallery

Chandrayaan-1

Chandrayaan-3 is a follow-on mission to Chandrayaan-2 to demonstrate end-to-end capability in safe landing and roving on the lunar surface. It consists of Lander and Rover configuration.

It will be launched by LVM3 from SDSC SHAR, Sriharikota. The propulsion module will carry the lander and rover configuration till 100 km lunar orbit. The propulsion module has Spectro-polarimetry of Habitable Planet Earth (SHAPE) payload to study the spectral and Polari metric measurements of Earth from the lunar orbit.

1. Lander payloads : RAMBHA-LP, ChaSTE and ILSA      2.

Rover payloads : APXS and LIBSKnow More

Chandrayaan-3, India’s third lunar exploration mission is ready to take off in fourth operational mission (M4) of LVM3 launcher. ISRO is crossing new frontiers by demonstrating soft landing on lunar surface by its lunar module and demonstrate roving on the lunar terrain. It is expected to be supportive to ISRO’s future interplanetary missions.Available here

The data acquired at various phases of the Chandrayaan-3 missionAccess here

Image Gallery

Chandrayaan-1

Chandrayaan-2

